Alice AI is a neural network family developed by the Russian company Yandex LLC. Alice AI can create and revise texts, generate new ideas and capture the context of the conversation with the user.
Alice AI is trained using a dataset which includes information from books, magazines, newspapers and other open sources available on the internet. The neural network may get facts wrong and fantasize, but as it learns, it will produce increasingly accurate answers.


== Usage ==
YandexGPT is integrated into virtual assistant Alice (an analog of Siri and Alexa) and is available in Yandex services and applications.
The company gives businesses access to the neural network’s API through the public cloud platform Yandex Cloud and develops its own B2B solutions on its basis.
Since July 2023, 800 companies have participated in the closed testing of YandexGPT. IT developers, banks, retail businesses, and companies from other industries can use the technology in two modes — API and Playground (an interface in the Yandex Cloud console for testing models and hypotheses).
Two model versions are available to businesses: one works in asynchronous mode and is better able to handle complex tasks, while the other is suitable for creating quick responses in real time. As a result, YandexGPT has been tested in dozens of scenarios such as content tasks, tech support, creating chatbots, virtual assistants, etc.


== History ==
In February 2023, Yandex announced that it was working on its own version of the ChatGPT generative neural network while developing a language model from the YaLM (Yet another Language Model) family. The project was tentatively named YaLM 2.0, which was later changed to YandexGPT.

On May 17, the company unveiled a neural network called YandexGPT (YaGPT) and enabled its virtual assistant Alice to interact with the new language model.
On June 15, 2023, Yandex added the YandexGPT language model to the image generation application Shedevrum. This enabled its users to create fully-fledged posts complete with a title, text, and relevant illustration.
In July 2023, YandexGPT launched new features enabling businesses to create virtual assistants and chatbots, as well as generate and structure texts.
On September 7, 2023, Yandex presented a new version of the language model, YandexGPT 2, at the Practical ML Conf. Compared to the previous one, the new version is able to perform more types of tasks, and the quality of answers has improved. The developers claimed that YandexGPT 2 answered user questions better than the first version in 67% of cases.
From October 6, 2023, YandexGPT can create short retellings of online Russian-language videos on the Internet. It can summarize videos that are from two minutes to four hours long and contain speech.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website