The Gow School is a college-prep boarding and day school located in South Wales, New York, United States, a hamlet close to Buffalo. It is for students, grades 6–12, with dyslexia and similar language-based learning disabilities, such as include developmental coordination disorder, auditory processing disorder, dyscalculia, dysgraphia, and disorder of written expression. Students may also have attention (ADD or ADHD) or executive function difficulties. The school was founded in 1926 by educator Peter Gow, along with insight from his colleague, neurologist Dr. Samuel T. Orton.


== History ==
The Gow School has its roots in the early teaching experience of founder Peter Gow Jr., who as an instructor at Choate Rosemary Hall, Nichols School, and The Park School of Buffalo had become interested in the plight of students who, though clearly intellectually able, struggled with certain aspects of learning in the language domain, especially spelling and reading. After contacting Dr. Samuel T. Orton, a noted New York physician who had done pioneering work in the area of dyslexia, Gow began development of the Reconstructive Language methodology that has been the backbone of the Gow School program since its founding.
Gow’s college preparatory curriculum is presented using a multi-sensory format in a technology rich environment. The 4:1 student to faculty ratio allows focus on the remediation of language based learning differences (reading, written expression, spelling, dysgraphia, auditory processing disorder and dyscalculia) through a phonics based program known as Reconstructive Language, a near relative of the Orton-Gillingham method. In addition to academics, Gow offers a strong athletic program, diverse fine arts curriculum, and a picturesque 100-acre (0.4 km2) campus.
During June and July, The Gow School offers a five week Summer Program for boys and girls who have experienced academic difficulties. The program combines morning classes with traditional afternoon and evening camp activities and weekend trips.
In 2020, former students came forward with credible allegations of sexual misconduct in the late 80's and early 90's. In March 2025, former Gow School administrator Matthew Fisher pled guilty to charges of possessing and producing child  pornography on the Gow School campus in Gow dormitories


== Campus ==
Orton Hall, built in 1987, houses the student study and the Constantine Computer Center.
Issac Arnold Library was built in 1978 and contains the school library and a number of administrative offices.


== Notable alumni ==
Brooks McCabe 1966, Democratic West Virginia State Senator
Quinn Bradlee 2002, learning disabilities advocate
Brian Talma ’84, Olympic windsurfer, member of Professional Windsurfing Association (PWA) World Tour, Barbados Service Star recipient
Daniel B. Wesson II '35, American inventor and firearms maker, who in 1968 founded the company now known as Dan Wesson Firearms.


== References ==


== External links ==
The Gow School