The Idiap Research Institute is a semi-private non-profit research institute based in Martigny, in the canton of Valais, Switzerland. It conducts research in the areas of speech processing, computer vision, information retrieval, biometric authentication, multimodal interaction and machine learning. The institute is affiliated with the École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), and with the Université de Genève.


== History ==
The institute was founded as the Istituto Dalle Molle di Intelligenza Artificiale Percettiva (French: Institut Dalle Molle d'intelligence artificielle perceptive) in 1991 by the Italian entrepreneur Angelo Dalle Molle through the Fondation Dalle Molle, in collaboration with the École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne and with local, cantonal and federal government bodies. Its purpose was to investigate the application of artificial intelligence to human perception in general, and to recognition and analysis of patterns in particular. In 1996, with the participation of the town of Martigny, the canton of Valais, the EPFL, the University of Geneva and Swisscom, it became a research foundation independent of the Dalle Molle foundation, and shortly after changed its name to Idiap Research Institute.
Idiap is one of the four Swiss research organisations founded by the Dalle Molle foundation, of which three are in the field of artificial intelligence.


== Research ==
Idiap was home to the National Centre of Competence in Research IM2 project on "Interactive Multimodal Information Management".
The institute receives federal support as a research facility in the field of artificial intelligence.
In 2020, researchers from the Idiap were developing software to detect deepfakes, as part of a broader effort to identify manipulated facial and vocal content in videos. The institute also participated in a Facebook-sponsored challenge to advance detection tools.


== Collaborations ==
In 2022, the Idiap Research Institute became a partner institution of the Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB). The agreement was established to strengthen collaboration in applying artificial intelligence to biological and biomedical data science, and to facilitate access to SIB's national network of expertise. As part of the partnership, Idiap also gained representation on SIB’s Foundation Council.


== References ==