James F. O'Brien is a computer graphics researcher and professor of computer science and electrical engineering at the University of California, Berkeley.  He is also co-founder and chief science officer at Avametric, a company developing software for virtual clothing try on. In 2015, he received an award for Scientific and Technical Achievement from the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences.


== Education ==
O'Brien received a Bachelor of Science in 1992 from Florida International University. He then did his graduate work under the supervision of Jessica Hodgins at Georgia Tech's GVU Center. He received his doctorate in Computer Science from the Georgia Institute of Technology College of Computing in 2000 for a thesis entitled Graphical Modeling and Animation of Fracture.


== Research and professional activities ==
O'Brien has published research papers on topics such as surface reconstruction, human figure animation, mesh generation, physically based animation, surgical simulation, computational fluid dynamics, and fracture propagation.
O'Brien served as a consultant on the development of the game physics engine Digital Molecular Matter (DMM). To date, this game engine has been used in Star Wars: The Force Unleashed and an off-line version of it was used for special effects in the film Avatar, Sucker Punch, Source Code, X-Men: First Class, and more than 60 other feature films.
In 2015, his work on developing DMM was recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences with a Technical Achievement award. The citation reads:
"To Ben Cole for the design of the Kali Destruction System, to Eric Parker for the development of the Digital Molecular Matter toolkit, and to James O’Brien for his influential research on the finite element methods that served as a foundation for these tools. The combined innovations in Kali and DMM provide artists with an intuitive, art-directable system for the creation of scalable and realistic fracture and deformation simulations. These tools established finite element methods as a new reference point for believable on-screen destruction."


== UC Berkeley ==
He joined UC Berkeley's Computer Science department as a faculty member in 2000. O'Brien runs the Berkeley Computer Animation and Modeling Group and his research focuses primarily on physically based animation, 3D modeling, and audio simulation.


== Photo forensics and fake media detection ==
O'Brien is a noted expert on detection and analysis of fake images and video. 
He has frequently worked with news organizations on exposing fake or altered photographs, as well as images created by generative artificial intelligence software. His methods have been used to expose fabrication of medical research records  prosecute child pornographers, validate evidentiary videos, and rule out conspiracy theories relating to photographs of the Moon landing. In response to their work debunking assertions that the shadows in photos of the 1969 Moon Landing and of Lee Harvey Oswald, coauthor Hany Farid has been accused by conspiracy theorists of being a time-traveling CIA operative.
In addition to developing methods for detecting fake images and video, O'Brien's has studied the impact of fake media on viewers and investigated what factors contribute to a viewer's acceptance or skepticism regarding the media they consume. O'Brien has stated that due to rapid progress in machine learning "it will be impossible to tell the difference between a generated image and a real one" and that detection software will be in an arms race that will eventually be lost to generative AI. He advocates for changing societal attitudes regarding trusting media and that viewers should suspect everything as potentially fake.


== Awards ==
SIGGRAPH Impact Award (1999)
Technology Review TR100 (2004)
Sloan Fellowship (2004)
College of Engineering Distinguished Alumni, Florida International University (2006)
GVU 15 Impact Award
Jim and Donna Gray Endowment Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Teaching (2008)
The Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences Award for Scientific and Technical Achievement ( A Sci-Tech Oscar, 2015 )
DreamWorks Animation award for Technical Achievement for work in the field of Machine Learning related to Character Rigging (2020)


== References ==


== External links ==
Home page at U. C. Berkeley
Computer Graphics Group at U. C. Berkeley
Berkeley Computer Animation and Modeling Group
Article in Time Magazine
Author profile in ACM Digital Library