Landmark College is a private college in Putney, Vermont, United States. Designed exclusively for students who learn differently, including those with a learning disability (such as dyslexia), ADHD, autism or executive function challenges, it was established in 1985 and was the first institution of higher learning to pioneer college-level studies for students with dyslexia.
The college offers associate and bachelor's degree programs in the liberal arts and sciences. It is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education (NECHE).


== History ==
The campus that the college occupies originally belonged to Windham College. After Windham shuttered in 1978, the campus remained unused. Plans for a prison and a conference center fell through. Putney Selectman Peter Shumlin persuaded the government to allow Landmark School in Beverly, Massachusetts, to start a college on the dormant campus. Landmark College was established in 1985.
Lynda Katz was appointed as the college's 3rd president in 1994. Dr. Katz came in with goal of expanding and renovating the campus, implementing a faculty rank & promotion system as well as increased salaries, and pinning the college on the map as a contributor to the state.
The newly renovated Strauch Family Student Center was opened in 1997, which houses Student Affairs offices, Health & Counseling, the campus bookstore, student mail, the Fireside Cafe, and game room.
From 1999-2000, Landmark College received a Title III grant which improved the college's academic and residential programs, and a Title VII from the US Department of Education, which allowed Landmark College to share their expertise on learning disability & ADHD nationwide.
On May 17, 2001, the Chris Family Click Center (or "Click Center" for short) opened with expanded recreation and exercise facilities, including a climbing wall, replacing the original "bubble" that previously occupied the space.
In early 2004, the Landmark College Board of Trustees approved 3 capital projects, which included the East Academic Building (now Lewis Academic Building), Dining Hall (now Alumni Dining Hall), and the Bridges suite-style residences.
Following Dr. Katz's retirement in 2011, Peter A. Eden was named as the college's 4th president on July 1 the same year. Dr. Eden came in with a biotechnology and science background, which pushed for new degree programs in the sciences, including the first bachelor degree programs.
Landmark began offering its first bachelor degree in 2012, a Bachelor of Arts in Liberal Studies. Associates degrees in Computer Science and Life Science were also offered the same year.
The college built a $9.6 million, 28,500-square-foot (2,650 m2)science and technology center named the MacFarlane Building in 2015. It was the first building erected since the college's founding.
In September 2016, Landmark College received a grant from the National Science Foundation of $650K. The Access to Innovative Education: STEM Opportunities for Students with Learning Disabilities (AIE-STEM) supports student scholar in its Computer Science and Life Science (now Biology) programs. Students in the program were offered scholarships up to $10K, and receive mentoring and internship opportunities.
On July 13, 2024, Jim Dlugos was named as interim president after Peter Eden's departure. In 2025, Dlugos was named as the permanent president after a presidential search committee came to an agreement with him.


== Academics ==

Applicants to the college are required to document average to above-average intelligence with the ability to complete college level work, along with a condition that impairs learning. Students are offered personal assistance in their studies, with a student-to-faculty ratio of 6:1, and a center for academic support employed with professional academic staff. Classroom faculty employ universal design principles and multi-modal teaching strategies.
The college offers associate degrees and, since 2012, has offered bachelor's degrees. Additionally, a post-baccalaureate certificate in Learning Differences and Neurodiversity aimed at education professionals was introduced in 2018.
High school students in several areas of Landmark's county, Windham, can access dual-enrollment NEASC-accredited courses. Middle school students can participate in a summer program called "Expanded Learning Opportunities in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics."
In 2011, The New York Times reported that 30% of students in the associate program graduated within three years; many dropped out in their first or second semester.


=== High School Summer Program ===
The three-week-long High School Program is intended to assist high school students entering their junior or senior year. The program is designed to help students who may be struggling in school to learn about their learning styles, develop good habits & study skills, and serve as an introduction to college level academics. Students must be between 16–18 years old in order to be eligible for the program.
The program also has a Social Pragmatics track, where for an additional fee, students receive instruction in the PEERS® curriculum for students struggling with making and keeping social connections. Students also have regular 1:1 sessions with a social coach.


== Costs ==
Tuition and fees for 2022–23 were $76,680, making it the 50th most expensive college, according to the National Center for Education Statistics. Tuition and fees for the 2015–2016 year were $51,330. In 2015, it topped CNN Money's list of the most expensive colleges. It was also the most expensive four-year private non-profit by list price according to the Department of Education's rankings for the 2012–2013 year; fees including room and board were reported to be $59,930 in 2013 and $61,910 in 2015. Scholarships of up to $30,000 are available.


== Student life ==
The average age is 20 years old, and about 97% of students live on campus. The male-to-female student ratio is about 3:1. Students are not required to have taken the SAT or ACT examinations. About half of Landmark's full-time students transferred from another college. Student turnover is high; there are now several bachelor's degrees offered, including Biology, Computer Science, Liberal Studies, Psychology, Integrated Arts, and Communications & Entrepreneurial Leadership (aka. COMEL) at the bachelors level. Associates Degree offerings include Business Studies, General Studies, Liberal Studies, Computer Science, and Biology.


== Facilities ==
Rooms are either doubles or singles. Residential halls are equipped with wireless Internet, laundry facilities, and common lounge space, as well as full-time residential staff. Some suite buildings have kitchens.
The four standard residence halls include Frost Hall, Alumni Hall (formerly Middle Hall), Stone Hall (formerly Hall 4), and Davis Hall, each can hold 55–75 students. Most students in their first year (and those who have not transferred from another college/university) will be placed in one of the four traditional buildings. Double-occupancy rooms make up a majority of the rooms in these buildings (with a handful of single-occupancy rooms)
Upperclass students can choose to live in premium housing options, including Aiken Hall, the Bridges, or Chumley. Bridges and Chumley offer suite/apartment style living with a common space, bathroom, and kitchenette for cooking including a stove, oven & microwave.


== Media ==
Media produced at the college include Impressions literary magazine, Voices Magazine student newspaper (formerly The Independent), WLMC Radio, and LC Voices.
WLMC Radio is the online streaming student-run radio station of Landmark College, broadcasting 24/7. The station has a regular cast of live DJs who are mostly students, but faculty and staff can also have shows. The station was founded in 2008 as part of a student initiative, and has been operating in the basement of the Strauch Family Student Center. WLMC Radio has won multiple awards from both the College Radio Foundation and the Intercollegiate Broadcasting System. Such awards include Spirit of College Radio, Best Streaming/Online Only Station Under 10K Students, Best Radio Drama, Best Public Service Announcement, and Best Spot News Interview.


== Notable alumni ==
Quinn Bradlee, filmmaker, author, and disability advocate
Dave Cole, visual artist and sculptor
Ennis Cosby, only son of American comedian Bill Cosby


=== Notable staff ===
Alice B. Fogel, poet and writer; English professor
Lesle Lewis, poet; English professor


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website