Lernmatrix (German for "learning matrix") is a special type of artificial neural network (ANN) architecture, similar to associative memory, invented around 1960 by Karl Steinbuch, a pioneer in computer science and ANNs.
This model for learning systems could establish complex associations between certain sets of characteristics (e.g., letters of an alphabet) and their meanings.


== Function ==
The Lernmatrix generally consists of n "characteristic lines" and m "meaning lines," where each characteristic line is connected to each meaning line, similar to how neurons in the brain are connected by synapses. (This can be realized in various ways – according to Steinbuch, this could be done by hardware or software).
To train a Lernmatrix, values are specified on the corresponding characteristic and meaning lines (binary or real); then the connections between all pairs of characteristic and meaning lines are strengthened by the Hebb rule. A trained Lernmatrix, when given a specific input on the characteristic lines, activates the corresponding meaning lines. In modern language, it is a linear projection module.
By appropriately interconnecting several Lernmatrices, a switching system can be built that, after completing certain training phases, is ultimately able to automatically determine the most probable associated meaning for an input sequence of features.


== See also ==
Artificial neural networks


== External links ==
A new theoretical framework for the Steinbuch's Lernmatrix
Pattern recognition and classification using weightless neural networks (WNN) and Steinbuch Lernmatrix
DARPA project will study neural network processes
Discussion in the newsgroup de.sci.informatik.ki (in German)
Wolfgang Hilberg: "Karl Steinbuch, ein zu Unrecht vergessener Pionier der künstlichen neuronalen Systeme", Communication from the Institute for Data Technology at the Technical University of Darmstadt, 1995, PDF file (size approx. 4 MB) (in German) accessed on June 17, 2017


== Further reading ==
Karl Steinbuch: Automat und Mensch. 1st ed. Springer 1961. (in German)


== References ==