Max Erik Tegmark (born Max Erik Shapiro on 5 May 1967) is a Swedish-American physicist, machine learning researcher and author. He is best known for his book Life 3.0 about what the world might look like as artificial intelligence continues to improve. Tegmark is a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the president of the Future of Life Institute. He is also a supporter of the effective altruism movement, and has received research grants from Elon Musk to investigate existential risk from artificial intelligence.


== Early life ==
Tegmark was born in Sweden to Karin Tegmark and American-born professor of mathematics Harold S. Shapiro, with his father's surname. First known as Max Shapiro, while studying at the University of California at Berkeley he adopted his mother's surname Tegmark, as there were many Shapiros in astronomy, including one of his professors. While in high school, Tegmark and a friend created and sold a word processor written in pure machine code for the Swedish eight-bit computer ABC 80, and a 3D Tetris-like game called Frac.
Tegmark left Sweden in 1990 after receiving his M.S.E in engineering physics from the KTH Royal Institute of Technology and a B.A. in economics the previous year at the Stockholm School of Economics. His first academic venture beyond Scandinavia brought him to California, where he studied physics at the University of California, Berkeley, earning his M.A. in 1992, and Ph.D. in 1994 under the supervision of Joseph Silk.
Tegmark was an assistant professor at the University of Pennsylvania, receiving tenure in 2003. In 2004, he joined the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's department of physics.


== Career ==
His research focuses on machine learning after an earlier phase focused on cosmology, combining theoretical work with new measurements to place constraints on cosmological models and their free parameters, often in collaboration with experimentalists. He has developed data analysis tools based on information theory and applied them to cosmic microwave background experiments such as COBE, QMAP, and WMAP, and to galaxy redshift surveys such as the Las Campanas Redshift Survey, the 2dF Survey and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey.
With Daniel Eisenstein and Wayne Hu, he introduced the idea of using baryon acoustic oscillations as a standard ruler. With Angelica de Oliveira-Costa and Andrew Hamilton, he discovered the anomalous multipole alignment in the WMAP data sometimes referred to as the "axis of evil". With Anthony Aguirre, he developed the cosmological interpretation of quantum mechanics. His 2000 paper on quantum decoherence of neurons
concluded that decoherence seems too rapid for Roger Penrose's "quantum microtubule" model of consciousness to be viable.
Tegmark has also formulated the "mathematical universe hypothesis", whose only postulate is that "all structures that exist mathematically exist also physically". In 2014, Tegmark published the book Our Mathematical Universe, which presents his idea at greater length. Tegmark suggests that the theory is simple in having no free parameters at all, and that in those structures complex enough to contain self-aware substructures (SASs), these SASs will subjectively perceive themselves as existing in a physically "real" world. The "mathematical universe" hypothesis has been criticized by some other scientists as being both overly speculative and unscientific in nature. For example, mathematical physicist Edward Frenkel characterized it as closer to "science fiction and mysticism" than "the realm of science."
Tegmark was elected Fellow of the American Physical Society in 2012 for, according to the citation, "his contributions to cosmology, including precision measurements from cosmic microwave background and galaxy clustering data, tests of inflation and gravitation theories, and the development of a new technology for low-frequency radio interferometry".
He was awarded the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Science's Gold Medal in 2019 for, according to the citation, "his contributions to our understanding of humanity's place in the cosmos and the opportunities and risks associated with artificial intelligence. He has courageously tackled these existential questions in his research and, in a commendable way, succeeded in communicating the issues to a wider public."
Tegmark is interviewed in the 2018 documentary on artificial intelligence Do You Trust This Computer? From 2020 onward, Tegmark led a research team-turned-nonprofit at MIT that developed an AI-driven news aggregator known as "Improving the News". "Improve the News" was rebranded to "Verity News" in 2023.
In 2024, Tegmark and his graduate student Ziming Liu were members of the team that developed Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks, a class of neural network which differs from the multilayer perceptron by being based around the Kolmogorov–Arnold representation theorem.


== Personal life ==
He married astrophysicist Angelica de Oliveira-Costa in 1997, and divorced in 2009. They have two sons. On August 5, 2012, Tegmark married Meia Chita.
Tegmark's brother is the journalist Per Shapiro, who has written for the populist Swedish newspaper Nya Dagbladet; the Future of Life Institute, which Tegmark co-founded and of which he is president, reportedly intended to donate $100,000 to 
Nya Dagbladet but ultimately did not do so.


== In the media ==

In 2006, Tegmark was one of fifty scientists interviewed by New Scientist about their predictions for the future. His prediction: "In 50 years, you may be able to buy T-shirts on which are printed equations describing the unified laws of our universes."
Tegmark appears in the 2007 documentary Parallel Worlds, Parallel Lives in which he is interviewed by Mark Oliver Everett, son of the founder of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, Hugh Everett.
Tegmark also appears in "Who's Afraid of a Big Black Hole?", "What Time is It?", "To Infinity and Beyond", "Is Everything We Know About The Universe Wrong?", "What is Reality?" and "Which Universe Are We In?", all part of the BBC's Horizon scientific series of programmes.
He appears in several episodes of Sci Fi Science: Physics of the Impossible, an American documentary television series on science which first aired in the United States on December 1, 2009. The series is hosted by theoretical physicist Michio Kaku.
Tegmark was interviewed by Morgan Freeman in seasons 2 and 3 of Through the Wormhole in 2011–2012.
Tegmark participated in the episode "Zooming Out" of BBC World Service's The Forum, which first aired on BBC Radio 4 on 26 April 2014.
In 2014, Tegmark co-authored an op-ed in The Huffington Post with Stephen Hawking, Frank Wilczek and Stuart Russell on the movie Transcendence.
In 2014, "The Perpetual Earth Program," a play based on Tegmark's book Our Mathematical Universe, was mounted in New York City as part of the Planet Connections Theatre Festival.
In 2014, he featured in The Principle, a documentary examining the Copernican Principle.
In 2015, Tegmark participated in an episode of Sam Harris' the Waking Up podcast entitled "The Multiverse & You (& You & You & You...)" where they discussed topics such as artificial intelligence and the mathematical universe hypothesis.
In 2017, Tegmark gave a talk entitled "Effective altruism, existential risk & existential hope" at the world's largest annual conference of the effective altruism movement.
In 2017, Tegmark participated in an episode of Sam Harris' the Waking Up podcast entitled "The Future of Intelligence" where they discussed topics such as artificial intelligence and definitions of life.
In 2018, Tegmark took part in a conversation with podcaster Lex Fridman about Artificial General Intelligence as part of a MIT course on AGI. He was the first guest on the Lex Fridman podcast. He was interviewed again on the Lex Fridman podcast in 2021 and in 2023.
In 2023, Tegmark drew controversy in the media because he had signed a letter of intent on behalf of the Future of Life Institute for an (ultimately rejected) $100,000 grant to far-right media outlet Nya Dagbladet. He later said that the Future of Life Institute "ultimately decided to reject it because of what our subsequent due diligence uncovered", that they rejected it long before the media became involved, and that the institute "finds Nazi, neo-Nazi or pro-Nazi groups or ideologies despicable and would never knowingly support them". An official statement from the Future of Life Institute further expands on this: "FLI finds groups or ideologies espousing antisemitism, white supremacy, or racism despicable and would never knowingly support any such group".
In 2023, Time named Tegmark one of the 100 most influential people in AI.


== Books ==
Our Mathematical Universe (2014)
Life 3.0: Being Human in the Age of Artificial Intelligence (2017)


== See also ==
List of astronomers
List of physicists


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website