Thornton Tomasetti is an American science and engineering consulting firm headquartered in New York City, United States. It operates globally and employs over 1,500 people. It was formerly known as the Thornton-Tomasetti Group, Thornton Tomasetti Engineers, Lev Zetlin & Associates, LZA Technology and Weidlinger Associates.


== Services ==
Thornton Tomasetti has expertise in structural engineering, facade engineering, forensic engineering, structural renovations, construction engineering, resilience (engineering and construction), sustainable design, applied science, protective design and security, civil engineering and bridge design and rehabilitation. The firm's services are supported by its internal research and development CORE teams, which provides technology-focused expertise, computational simulation and software development as well as artificial intelligence and machine learning.
The firm provides consulting expertise to clients in a variety of industries, including architecture, engineering, construction, insurance and law firms, real estate developers, building owners and operators, defense, life sciences, manufacturing, natural resources and space systems.


== History ==
1949—Paul Weidlinger opens consultancy: Weidlinger Associates dates back to 1949 with the launch of Paul Weidlinger Consulting Engineers in Washington, D.C. A native of Budapest, Hungary, Paul earned a master's degree from the ETH Zurich in Zurich. He apprenticed with Le Corbusier in Paris and László Moholy-Nagy in London before coming to the United States in the late 1940s.
1950s—Applied Science division launched: Paul Weidlinger, Dr. Mario Salvadori and Dr. Melvin Baron shared an interest in the dynamic response of structures, which led the firm to create an Applied Science division. The group developed analysis and design procedures to protect structures from the effects of blast loadings. Their methods led to early and continuing use of computers in advanced analysis and design.
1956—Lev Zetlin starts Lev Zetlin Associates: After earning a doctoral degree from New York’s Cornell University, Lev Zetlin decided to start his own company, Lev Zetlin Associates (LZA).
1960—Charlie Thornton joins LZA: Charlie Thornton, who earned master’s and doctoral degrees from New York University and authored a thesis on cable nets, joined Lev Zetlin Associates in 1960. Serving as co-chairman of the firm until 2004, he was involved in the analysis, design and construction of projects worldwide.
1964 -- 1964 New York World’s Fair (Flushing Meadows, New York): Early in his career, Lev Zetlin devised a “double-layer bicycle wheel” roof system. The system combines upper and lower cables with varying tensions that are jacked apart and connected by rigid vertical struts. Connecting cables that have differing natural frequencies minimizes wind-induced fluttering. First developed for the Utica Memorial Auditorium, which was completed in 1960, Lev Zetlin's bicycle wheel system has helped to shape the design of other tensile structures, among them the New York State Pavilion, Madison Square Garden, the Seoul Olympic Gymnastics Arena, Tropicana Field, and the Georgia Dome.
1968—Richard Tomasetti joins LZA: Richard Tomasetti joined Lev Zetlin Associates after working in the aerospace and submarine industries. Tomasetti created Environspace Research and Development, the firm’s first research and development group.

1977—Charlie Thornton and Richard Tomasetti buy LZA from Gable Industries: Charlie Thornton and Richard Tomasetti purchased Lev Zetlin Associates while it was a subsidiary of Gable Industries. It was at this time that the firm began performing some work as Thornton Tomasetti. The firm's name changed officially from the TTG Group to Thornton Tomasetti in 1999.
1980s-1990s—FLEX code introduced: The FLEX code was first developed by Weidlinger in the early 1980s to support Nuclear Test Ban Treaty monitoring. Its name is derived from its primary focus, performing "fast large explicit" time-domain dynamic simulations, and from its versatility and speed in modeling unusually large structures. In the early 1990s, the FLEX code was diversified into a family: NLFlex (blast), EMFlex (electromagnetic waves), and PZFlex (sonar and ultrasound). In 1999, SpectralFlex was developed to serve the growing field of medical therapeutics, and in 2002, Weidlinger created the FLEX Template System, for modeling and simulation of structural components of civilian structures subjected to bomb blasts.
2001—World Trade Center collapse (New York, New York): In the 10 months after the September 11 attacks, crews removed more than 1.6 million tons of debris. Thornton Tomasetti staff were the first engineers on the site on September 11, and started work that afternoon. The firm supervised 20 member firms of the Structural Engineers Association of New York and arranged for 24/7 coverage of the site for nine months. The firm assisted in rescue, demolition and clean-up, advising on structural issues that required resolution as part of the recovery effort.
2004—Taipei 101 (Taipei, Taiwan) Completed: The first 21st-century building to become the world’s tallest upon completion, Taipei 101 is, as its name implies, a 101-story tower. Working with engineer of record Evergreen Consulting, Thornton Tomasetti established an efficient steel-based dual structural system and solved wind behavior problems with distinctive double stair-step corners. By 2020, Thornton Tomasetti had designed five of the 20 tallest complete buildings in the world.
2011 – CORE studio founded: CORE studio is the firm's internal research and development group that specializes in application development, computational modeling and artificial intelligence to create efficiencies in the structural design and construction process.
2012—Response to Hurricane Sandy: On October 29, 2012, Hurricane Sandy made landfall near Atlantic City, New Jersey. In response, the firm conducted damage assessment in three states related to structural and architectural integrity, HVAC, electrical, plumbing and fire protection equipment and systems. Included in the investigations were high-rise office and residential facilities, and other retail, rail, aviation and government facilities.
2015—Thornton Tomasetti and Weidlinger merge: Thornton Tomasetti and Weidlinger Associates announced a merger. Weidlinger Associates was a U.S.-based structural engineering firm that designed and rehabilitated buildings, bridges, and infrastructure and provided special services in applied science, forensics, and physical security. The merger created two new entities: CORE Lab - a sister internal group to CORE studio - that focuses on the long-term development of internal methods, capabilities and products to evaluate new business opportunities; and TTWiiN, a technology accelerator and product commercialization platform.


== Projects ==


=== Skyscrapers, buildings and structures ===
1111 South Wabash, Chicago
110 North Wacker, Chicago
181 West Madison, Chicago
191 North Wacker, Chicago
30 Hudson Street, Jersey City, New Jersey
30 West Oak, Chicago
401 East Ontario, Chicago
420 Fifth Avenue, New York
5 Times Square, New York
546 Fifth Avenue, New York
55 East Erie, Chicago
550 West Jackson, Chicago
599 Lexington Avenue, New York
717 Texas Avenue, Houston, Texas
745 Seventh Avenue, New York
840 North Lake Shore Drive, Chicago
855 Avenue Of The Americas, New York
601 North Central, Phoenix, Arizona
20 Grosvenor Square, London
ABN AMRO Plaza, Chicago
AMA Building, Chicago
Americas Tower, New York
Block A & Block C, MGM CityCenter – "Project CityCenter", Las Vegas, Nevada
Block 21, Austin, Texas
Bloomberg Tower, 731 Lexington Avenue, New York
CBS 2 Broadcast Center, Chicago
Chase Center, Chicago
Chifley Tower, Sydney, Australia
Children's Museum of Los Angeles, Los Angeles
Citicorp Center, Chicago, Illinois
City View Tower, Chicago, Illinois
Conrad Chicago Hotel, Chicago
Comcast Technology Center, Philadelphia
Continental Center, New York
Deep Space Auditorium, Verona, Wisconsin
Embassy Suites, New York
Erie on the Park, Chicago
Eurasia Tower, Moscow
Federation Tower, Moscow
Fifty South Sixth, Minneapolis
Furman Hall, New York
Great American Tower at Queen City Square, Cincinnati
Harborside Financial Center Plaza 5 & Plaza 10, Jersey City, New Jersey
Hilton New Orleans Riverside, New Orleans
Kingsbury on the Park, Chicago
Lehman Brothers Building, New York
Leo Burnett Building, Chicago
Lotte Center Hanoi, Hanoi, Vietnam
McMahon Hall of Fordham University, New York
Menara Maxis, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Metapolis, Hwaseong, South Korea
Minneapolis Central Library, Minneapolis
Miranova Condominiums, Columbus, Ohio
Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, Fort Worth, Texas
New York Times Building, New York
One Indiana Square, Indianapolis
One Liberty Place, Philadelphia
One Mellon Bank Center, Pittsburgh
One Pennsylvania Plaza, Philadelphia
Optima Horizons, Evanston, Illinois
Optima Towers, Evanston, Illinois
Overture Center, Madison, Wisconsin
Palazzo Lombardia, Milan, Italy
Park Alexandria, Chicago
Petronas Towers, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Ping An Finance Centre, Shenzhen, China
Plaza 66, Shanghai, PRC
Prentice Women's Hospital, Chicago
R R Donnely Building, Chicago
Random House World Headquarters, New York
Shanghai Tower, Shanghai, China
Taipei 101, Taipei, Taiwan
Tencent Headquarters, Shenzhen, China
The Clare at Water Tower, Chicago
The Edge, Brooklyn, New York
The Westport, New York
The Plaza at PPL Center, Allentown, Pennsylvania
Times Square Tower, New York
UBS Tower, Chicago, Illinois
University of Chicago Graduate School of Business Building, Chicago, Illinois
We've the Zenith, Busan, South Korea
Westin Hotel at Copley Place, Boston
Wilshire Grand Tower, Los Angeles
Winspear Opera House, Dallas
Wuhan Greenland Center, Wuhan, China


=== Stadiums and convention centers ===

American Airlines Arena, Miami
Arvest Ballpark. Springdale, Arkansas
Al-Najaf International Stadium, Najaf, Iraq
AT&T Park, San Francisco
Baku National Stadium, Baku, Azerbaijan
Ball Arena, Denver
Banc of California Stadium, Los Angeles, California
Barclays Center, Brooklyn, New York
Basra Sports City, Basra, Iraq
BMO Field, Toronto, Canada
BOK Center, Tulsa, Oklahoma
Bridgestone Arena, Nashville, Tennessee
Children's Mercy Park, Kansas City, Kansas
Climate Pledge Arena, Seattle, Washington
CONSOL Energy Center, Pittsburgh
Ford Center, Evansville, Indiana
Ford Field, Detroit, Michigan
Golden 1 Center, Sacramento, California
Honda Center, Anaheim, California
Jeju World Cup Stadium, Seogwipo, South Korea
Kohl Center, Madison, Wisconsin
MetLife Stadium, East Rutherford, New Jersey
Nationals Park, Washington, D.C.
Nationwide Arena, Columbus, Ohio
Petco Park, San Diego
Philips Arena, Atlanta
PNC Park, Pittsburgh
Prudential Center, Newark, New Jersey
Rogers Place, Edmonton, Canada
Soldier Field, Chicago
United Center, Chicago
U.S. Cellular Field, Chicago
U.S. Bank Stadium, Minneapolis
Videotron Centre, Quebec City
Yankee Stadium, New York


=== Renewal and rehabilitation ===
Chrysler Building – Facade Rehabilitation, New York
Kaufmann Stadium - Renovation, Jackson County, Missouri
United States Capitol dome – Structural Rehabilitation, Washington, D.C.
Washington Monument Renovation, Washington, D.C.
Winter Garden Reconstruction – Structural Repairs, New York
Wrigley Field – Structural Rehabilitation & Addition, Chicago


=== Forensics, investigation and property loss consulting ===
i-35 bridge collapse, Minneapolis, Minnesota
Indiana State Fair stage collapse
Miller Park investigation, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Response to CAT-90 Sandy, New York, New Jersey and Connecticut
Tropicana parking garage collapse, Atlantic City, New Jersey
World Trade Center disaster response, New York
Arecibo Telescope Collapse, Arecibo, Puerto Rico


=== Under construction ===
151 Incheon Tower, Incheon, South Korea
Baha Mar, The Bahamas
Comcast Technology Center, Philadelphia
CPKC Stadium, Kansas City, Missouri
Diamond of Istanbul, Istanbul, Turkey
Jeddah Tower, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
Moscow International Business Center Lot 13, Moscow
Museum of the Built Environment, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
One Broadway Plaza, Santa Ana, California
San Francisco Transbay Terminal, San Francisco
Signature Tower Jakarta, Jakarta, Indonesia
SOCAR Tower, Baku, Azerbaijan


== Affiliated organizations ==
 Thornton Tomasetti Foundation - The Thornton Tomasetti Foundation, a tax-exempt, nonprofit organization established in February 2008, is focused on funding fellowships, scholarships and internships for undergraduate students and those planning to pursue graduate studies in building engineering, design or technology. It also provides financial support for individuals and organizations pursuing philanthropic activities related to building engineering, design or technology.
 TTWiiN – TTWiiN, an innovation accelerator, was formed following the merger of Thornton Tomasetti and Weidlinger Associates in 2015. TTWiiN identify technologies and products that have commercial applicability and appeal for a broad audience across many industries.
 ACE Mentorship - Charlie Thornton founded The ACE Mentor Program, which is a not-for-profit organization, formed to enlighten and motivate students toward architecture, construction, engineering, and related careers by providing mentoring opportunities for future designers and constructors.
 AEC Angels – Thornton Tomasetti is a founding member of this venture fund, which covers seed through Series B + investments in the AEC sector.


== Notable alumni ==


== External links ==
Thornton Tomasetti Corporate Website
Thornton Tomasetti Foundation
ACE Mentor Program


== References ==