Cleophis (Sanskrit: Kripa ) was an Assacani queen and key figure in the war between the Assacani people and Alexander the Great.  Cleophis was the mother of Assacanus, the Assacanis' war-leader at the time of Alexander's invasion in 326 BCE. After her son's death in battle, Cleophis assumed command and negotiated a settlement that allowed her to retain her status. Later accounts claim Cleophis had a son by Alexander, a notion dismissed by historians.
The Assacani (called Ashvakas in Sanskrit, from the word Ashva, meaning "horse") were an independent people who lived in parts of the Swat and Buner valleys in ancient Gandhara. These highlanders were rebellious, fiercely independent clans who resisted subjugation.


== Alexander's war with the Assacani ==
In 326 BCE, Alexander's campaigns west of the Indus River brought him into conflict with the Assacani. In defence of their homeland, they assembled an army of 20,000 cavalry, 38,000 infantry, and 30 elephants, according to classical writer Quintus Curtius Rufus. Their army included a contingent of 7,000 Kamboj mercenaries recruited from Abhisara. 
After being defeated in the field, the Assacani fell back to the fortified city of Massaga, where the fighting continued for five days (or nine days, according to Curtius.) It was during this battle that Assacanus was killed. After her son's death, Cleophis assumed command, mustered the Assacani women to fight, and led the continued defence of the city. Rule of the Assacani fell to Cleophis.
Eventually, however, Cleophis judged that defeat was inevitable. She came to terms with the invaders and abandoned Massaga with her followers. Diodorus Siculus says: "Cleophis sent precious gifts to Alexander with a message in which she expressed her appreciation of Alexander's greatness and assured him that she would comply with the terms of the treaty."  According to Curtius and Arrian, Cleophis was captured along with her young granddaughter. Alexander allowed Queen Cleophis to maintain her throne as his vassal.
Alexander's retaliation against the defeated Assaceni was severe.  He had Massaga burned.  Victor Hansen writes: "After promising the surrounded Assaceni their lives upon capitulation, he executed all their soldiers who had surrendered. Their strongholds at Ora and Aornus, were also likewise stormed. Garrisons were probably all slaughtered."
Additionally, Alexander pursued the Kamboj mercenaries, surrounded them on a hill, and killed them all. Diodorus describes the event in detail: "...The women, taking up the arms of the fallen, fought side by side with their men. Accordingly, some who had supplied themselves with arms did their best to cover their husbands with their shields, while others, who were without arms, did much to impede the enemy by flinging themselves upon them and catching hold of their shields."


== Cleophis and Alexander ==
Later classical writers, including Curtius and Justin, claim that Alexander fathered a child with Cleophis. Historians dismiss this notion as a much later romantic invention. On Alexander's relatively generous terms, which allowed Cleophis to retain her status, Curtius says, "...some believed that this indulgent treatment was accorded rather to the charms of her person than to pity for her misfortunes. At all events, afterwards she gave birth to a son who received the name Alexander whoever his father may have been..." Earlier writers do not mention this. 


== See also ==
Porus
Abisares
Taxiles


== References ==


== Books and magazines ==
Historie du bouddhisme Indien, Dr E. Lammotte
Alexander the Great, 2003 - Cambridge University Press, W. W. Tarn
Political History of Ancient India, 1996, Dr H. C. Raychaudhury
The Invasion Of India By Alexander The Great As Described By Arrian, Q. Curtius, Diodorus, Plutarch And Justin, J. W. McCrindle
Envy of the Gods: Alexander the Great's Ill-fated Journey Across Asia, John Prevas
Carnage and Culture: Landmark Battles in the Rise to Western Power, Victor Hanson
Alexander: A History of the Origin and Growth of the Art of War from the Earliest Times to the Battle of Ipsus, 301 Bc, With a Detailed Account of the Campaigns, 1996- Da Capo Press, Theodore Ayrault Dodge
Alexander the Great in Fact and Fiction, 2002 - Oxford University Press, USA, A. B. Bosworth and E. J. Baynham
The Wars of Alexander the Great, 2002- Osprey Publishing, Waldemar Heckel
Classical Accounts of India, J. W. McCrindle
History and Culture of Indian People, The Age of Imperial Unity, Dr R. C. Majumdar, Dr A. D. Pusalkar
Ancient India, 2003, Dr V. D. Mahajan
Problems of Ancient India, 2000, K. D. Sethna
The Pathan., 1967, Olaf Caroe
Historical Essays, Second Series, 3rd edition, Edward A. Freeman, M. A., HON. D. C. L. & LL.D., Regius Professor of Modern History in the University of Oxford, London Macmillan and Co. And New York,1892
Alexander the Great, 2003, Dr W. W. Tarn
Studies in Indian History and Civilization, Dr Buddha Parkash
Ancient Kamboja, People and the Country, 1981, Dr J. L. Kamboj
Hindu Polity, A constitutional History of India in Hindu Times, 1978, p 140, 121, Dr K. P. Jayswal


== External links ==
Krateros (Editor), Article Cleophis in ancientlibrary.com 2005.