Li'l Horrors is an Australian children's comedy puppetry television series which screened on the Seven Network in 2001. The series contained 52 episodes each 12 minute, 30 seconds in length, with double episodes usually screened in a 30-minute time slot.


== Plot ==
Li'l Horrors takes place in the home of horror actress Morbidda Bates. The series follows the adventures of little monster characters based on classic, fictional horror characters such as Count Dracula, Frankenstein's Monster, The Mummy, The Werewolf, Gill-Man, Zombie, Quasimodo, Medusa and Gargoyles.


== Characters ==
Vladamir "Vlad" Bloode, a vampire based on Dracula from Bram Stoker's gothic horror novel of the same name. A notorious trickster around Maug Stone Hall, his favourite pastime is to pull practical jokes at the other Horrors' expense.
Duncan Stein, based on Frankenstein's monster from the 1931 film Frankenstein. Gluttonous yet friendly, and yet also dim-witted and sorely lacking in social skills.
Cleo Patra, an Egyptian mummy based on modern pop culture. Uses a lot of Valley Girl filler in her speech. Ironically her namesake was not a native-born Egyptian but a Greek immigrant.
Webster Swampson, a piscine boy based on various sea monsters. School Brainiac and a bit of a nerd. Often turned to, to get the other Horrors out of a crisis. Storylines based around him involve some invention of his.
Abercrombie Necros, a zombie who does little more than watch television. When the set is faulty, broken, or otherwise out of order, he often melts down, simply by repeating phrases often appearing on television sets without reliable signals. These meltdowns don't happen every time though.
Medusilla Venimski, a pretty monster based on (and named for) the youngest of three gorgons, Medusa. Very vain as she often admires her beauty, which does not turn others (or herself) to stone, unlike the ugliness of her namesake. Her hair can talk as well, as evidenced in several episodes.
Claudia Howell, a werewolf girl, who, unlike her mythological basis, appears to have no human form (however, she does live in fear of transforming into a sweet little girl every full moon). Acts and communicates like a dog, for example, growling when angered or insulted. Sensitive to insults towards categories she falls within, and often the target of Vlad's trickery.
Quasi Modo, a thorough spoof of Quasimodo from Victor Hugo's 1831 novel, the Hunchback of Notre Dame. Does not appear in every episode.
Garg, one of two grotesques
Goyle, Garg's permanent companion
Bruce
Ratso Risotto
Humpfree
Morbidda Bates (known as "Miss Morbidda" to the Li'l Horrors), the owner of Maug Stone Hall. Unseen but referred to in most episodes. Her voice addresses the Horrors in the opening credits.


== List of episodes ==
Monsters 'r Us by Brendan Luno
Lolly Folly by Robert Greenberg
Fangs for Your by Robert Greenberg
Time Out ! by Brendan Luno
Ghost of a Chance by Kevin Nemeth
Ghoul Friends by Kevin Nemeth
Rock Shock by Glen Dolman
Trial and Terror by Glen Dolman
I Want my Mummy by Jamie Forbes
Were-with All by Beverley MacDonald
Webster the Brave by Nancy Groll
The Morbida Mystery by Nancy Groll
Trouble Double by Clare Madsen
The Coming of Quasi by Clare Madsen
Stop and Gough by David Phillips
Ice Scream by David Phillips
The Cubby House War by Brendan Luno
Beelzebubba by Brendan Luno
Love Lettuce in the Sand (Which) by Jamie Forbes
Play's the Thing by Hugh Stuckey
Humpy Birthday to You by Anthony Watt
Send in the Clones by Anthony Watt
The Magic Hat by Glen Dolman
The Treasure of the Scary Madre by Glen Dolman
Comet Through the Wry by Adam Todd
The Bleurgh with Project by Adam Todd
Who Wants to Flea a Million Heirs by Anthony Watt
The Spaceman Cometh by Anthony Watt
Wouldn't it be Nice Revolting by Brendan Luno
Mirror, Rirrom by Brendan Luno
Now You See Me, Now You Don't by Glen Dolman
The Good, the Bad and the Fluffy by Glen Dolman
For whom the Bell Tolls by Annie Fox
Mummy, Dearest by Annie Fox
Revenge of the Zombie by Meg Mappin
Vlad and Duncan's Excellent Adventure by Penelope Trevor
Hall of the Mounted Things by Forbes
Home Alone by Anthony Watt
I Dream of Greenie by Anthony Watt
Who Dares Wins by David Rapsey
Under Your Spell by David Rapsey
Follow the Black Asphalt Road by Anthony Watt
Happily Ever Laughter by Anthony Watt
Altered States by Brendan Luno
Hamelot in Camelot by Brendan Luno
Stinging in the Reign by Peter Hepworth
I Won't, Dunce by Peter Hepworth
Pants on Fire by Nancy Groll
Head of the Class by Ray Boseley
Speak No Evil by Chris Annastasiades
The Wolf Who Cried Boy by Nancy Groll


== Voices ==
Paula Morrell
Ric Herbert
Rachel King
Richard Hart
Abbe Holmes
Michael King
Matthew King


== International ==
The series also screened in the UK, Canada and France.


== See also ==
List of Australian television series


== References ==


== External links ==
Li'l Horrors at December Media
Li'l Horrors at Australian Television Information Archive
Li'l Horrors at Screen Australia
Li'l Horrors at IMDb