This is a list of Asterix films.


== Films ==


=== Animation ===


=== English cast and characters ===

1967 – Asterix the Gaul (Astérix le Gaulois) with Roger Carel as Asterix and Jacques Morel as Obelix
1968 – Asterix and Cleopatra (Astérix et Cléopâtre) with Roger Carel as Asterix and Jacques Morel as Obelix
1976 – The Twelve Tasks of Asterix (Les Douze travaux d'Astérix) with Roger Carel as Asterix and Jacques Morel as Obelix
1985 – Asterix Versus Caesar (Astérix et la surprise de César) with Roger Carel as Asterix and Pierre Tornade as Obelix
1986 – Asterix in Britain (Astérix chez les Bretons) with Roger Carel as Asterix and Pierre Tornade as Obelix
1989 – Asterix and the Big Fight (Astérix et le coup du menhir) (book of the film: Operation Getafix) with Roger Carel as Asterix and Pierre Tornade as Obelix
1994 – Asterix Conquers America — produced in Germany as (Asterix in Amerika) with Craig Charles as Asterix and Howard Lew Lewis as Obelix
2006 – Asterix and the Vikings (Astérix et les Vikings) with Paul Giamatti as Asterix and Brad Garrett as Obelix
2014 – Asterix: The Mansions of the Gods (Astérix: Le Domaine des Dieux) with Roger Carel as Asterix and Guillaume Briat as Obelix
2018 – Asterix: The Secret of the Magic Potion (Astérix: Le Secret de la potion magique) with Christian Clavier as Asterix and Guillaume Briat as Obelix
2026 – Asterix: The Kingdom of Nubia (Astérix : Le Royaume de Nubie) with Christian Clavier as Asterix and François-Xavier Demaison as Obelix


=== Live-action ===

1967 – Two Romans in Gaul (Deux Romains en Gaule) - a television film combining live action and animation; black & white and one hour long. Long considered unavailable, it was released on DVD in 2012.
1999 – Asterix and Obelix Take on Caesar (Astérix et Obélix contre César) with Christian Clavier as Asterix and Gérard Depardieu as Obelix
2002 – Asterix & Obelix: Mission Cleopatra (Astérix et Obélix : Mission Cléopâtre) with Christian Clavier as Asterix and Gérard Depardieu as Obelix
2008 – Asterix at the Olympic Games (Astérix aux Jeux Olympiques) with Clovis Cornillac as Asterix and Gérard Depardieu as Obelix
2012 – Asterix and Obelix: God Save Britannia (Astérix et Obélix : Au service de sa Majesté) with Édouard Baer as Asterix and Gérard Depardieu as Obelix
2023 – Asterix & Obelix: The Middle Kingdom (Astérix et Obélix : l'Empire du milieu) with Guillaume Canet as Asterix and Gilles Lellouche as Obelix


== History ==

No novelizations were made for Asterix the Gaul, Asterix in Britain or Asterix and Cleopatra which followed the original albums relatively closely.
In 1967, there was an attempt to make an animated film based on Asterix and the Golden Sickle, which was not completed. The incomplete script and drawings were sold in a book-exhibition in Brussels and is today a part of the book The Mirror World of Asterix. Another reason for its failure is that Goscinny and Uderzo rejected the artists from releasing this movie because of its low-quality drawings.
The Twelve Tasks of Asterix is the only animated movie not based (at least loosely) on any of the comic books until the 2018 film The Secret of the Magic Potion.
Starting from 1985's Asterix Versus Caesar the animation quality improved dramatically.
Asterix Conquers America was the only one produced solely outside France.
Early English dubbed versions of cartoon movies used character names from the Ranger/Look and Learn "Asterix the Briton" translations, such as Tunabrix for the village chieftain.
Asterix Conquers America, Asterix and the Vikings and Asterix: The Mansions of the Gods are digitally drawn and animated.
Asterix: The Mansions of the Gods is the first Asterix movie in stereoscopic 3D.
The animated Asterix movies that were dubbed into English were all dubbed in either France, the United Kingdom or Germany, with the exception of Asterix and the Vikings, where it was then dubbed in the United States, in order to bring Asterix into the U.S. market, while The Mansion of the Gods and The Secret of the Magic Potion were dubbed by Ocean Productions in Canada. A North American dub of Asterix and the Big Fight is used in all DVD releases, but fans generally consider it inferior to the original British dub, which is only available on VHS.
Asterix Conquers America and Asterix and the Vikings are the only animated Asterix films to be produced in English first, then dubbed into French.
Though several of the Asterix comics are available in the United States, most of the Asterix films have not seen releases in America, likely due to the comics being not as popular as in the United Kingdom. The first five films (Asterix the Gaul, Asterix and Cleopatra, The Twelve Tasks of Asterix, Asterix and Caesar and Asterix in Britain) did see VHS releases through Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment and Just for Kids Home Video, but all five have since gone out of print.


== See also ==
List of films based on French-language comics


== References ==


== External links ==
Asterix at the IMDB