Manetho (; Koine Greek: Μανέθων Manéthōn, gen.: Μανέθωνος, fl. 290–260 BCE) was an Egyptian priest of the Ptolemaic Kingdom who lived in the early third century BCE, at the very beginning of the Hellenistic period. Little is certain about his life. He is known today as the author of a history of Egypt in Greek called the Aegyptiaca (History of Egypt), written during the reign of Ptolemy I Soter or Ptolemy II Philadelphus (285–246 BCE). None of Manetho’s original texts have survived; they are lost literary works, known only from fragments transmitted by later authors of classical and late antiquity.

The remaining fragments of the Aegyptiaca continue to be a singular resource for delineating Egyptian chronology, more than two millennia since its composition. Until the decipherment of Ancient Egyptian scripts in the early 19th century CE, Manetho's fragments were an essential source for understanding Egyptian history. His work remains of unique importance in Egyptology.


== Works attributed to Manetho ==
Eight works have been attributed to Manetho:

Aegyptiaca
The Book of Sothis
The Sacred Book
An Epitome of Physical Doctrines
On Festivals
On Ancient Ritual and Religion
On the Making of Kyphi [a kind of incense]
Criticisms of Herodotus
Some of these have been considered "ghost" titles. Of these eight, modern scholars agree that: the historical Manetho is the author of Aegyptiaca; that Manetho cannot be the author of Sothis; and that the Criticisms is likely a part of the larger Aegypticia and not written as a separate work.


== Name ==

Scholars agree that "Manetho" is a Greek transcription of an Egyptian name, however there is no consensus on the original. Some speculate that it is a theophoric name invoking either the god Thoth or the goddess Neith, e.g. "Truth of Thoth", "Beloved of Neith", or similar. Another proposal is "I have seen the great god". Others propose an occupational name based on Egyptian Myinyu-heter ("Shepherd" or "Groom"). In Latin sources he is called Manethon, Manethos, Manethonus, and Manetos.
The earliest attestations of his name, all in Greek, come from three sources: an inscription found in Carthage; the Hibeh papyrus; and the writings of Josephus. The name that he called himself in Greek was likely Manethôn.


== Historical context ==

Manetho lived and worked at the very beginning of the new Hellenistic order in Egypt, when the Macedonian Greek Diadochi (successors) of Alexander the Great (d. 323 BCE) fought each other for control of the new empire, a struggle finally ending in partition. In Egypt, diadochos Ptolemy I Soter founded the Ptolemaic Kingdom in 305 BCE. Reigning for nearly three centuries, the Ptolemies were the final and longest-lived dynasty of ancient Egypt before Roman conquest in 30 BCE. They introduced the Hellenistic religion, a unique syncretism between Greek and Egyptian religions and cultures. Manetho wrote Aegyptiaca in order to preserve the history of his homeland for posterity and—as evidenced by his having written it in Greek—for its new foreign rulers.
Manetho originated in Sebennytos and was likely a priest of the solar deity Ra at Heliopolis. He was an authority on the temple cult of Serapis (a Hellenistic appropriation of Osiris and Apis).
Most of the ancient witnesses group Manetho together with the Mesopotamian writer Berossus and treat the pair as similar in intent. Those who preserved the bulk of their writing are largely the same (Josephus, Africanus, Eusebius, and Syncellus). Both wrote in Greek at about the same time, and adopted the historiographical approach of the Greek writers Herodotus and Hesiod who preceded them. Both used chronological royal genealogies and regnal lists (also called "king-lists") as the structure for the narratives, and extended their histories far into a mythic past or origin myth—in Manetho's case a syncretized one. Modern historians consider Berossus and Manetho to have been rough contemporaries.


== The fragments of Manetho ==
All of Manetho's original works are lost. What remains are purported excerpts, epitomes (summaries), and allusions as transmitted in the writings of later authors. These pieces of transmitted text are called "literary fragments"; and scholars have indexed individual fragments with numbers, as in "Fragment 1", "Fragment 2", etc.
Two English translations of the fragments of Manetho have been published: one by William Gillan Waddell (1884 – 1945) in 1940, and another by Gerald P. Verbrugghe and John Moore Wickersham in 2001.
Waddell's 1940 translation grouped fragments based on the preserving author and attempted to arrange them according to Manetho's original dynastic structure. His numbering followed this organizational principle.
Verbrugghe and Wickersham's work is informed by scholarship published after Waddell, particularly that of the German classicist and philologist Felix Jacoby (1876 – 1959).
Jacoby's Fragments of the Greek Historians (Ger: Die Fragmente der griechischen Historiker), commonly abbreviated as "FGrHist" or "FGrH", is a reference work that compiles extant citations, excerpts, and epitomes of otherwise lost works by ancient historians written in Greek. Jacoby's section on Manetho (FGrHist 609) established a highly influential system for classifying and numbering the fragments.
Verbrugghe and Wickersham's decision to base their work on Jacoby's system reflects a desire to align with the prevailing scholarly consensus in the field. Jacoby's work is known for its meticulousness and comprehensive approach to fragment collection and analysis. As Jacoby's work was in German and not immediately accessible in English translation at the time that Verbrugghe and Wickersham were working, their translation and commentary proved invaluable for English-speaking scholars.


== The Aegyptiaca ==

The Aegyptiaca (Αἰγυπτιακά, Aigyptiaka), (or "History of Egypt") was a chronological history divided into three papyrus scrolls (Gr: tomoi), or "books" or "volumes"; it may have been written as a response to Herodotus' Histories. It is—or more precisely, its accumulated fragments are—a foundational text for understanding the very long history of ancient Egypt, particularly Egyptian chronology. It or its fragments were for many centuries a primary source on the subject until the decipherment of Ancient Egyptian scripts in the early 19th century CE. The text remains significant in Egyptology.
Manetho's Aegyptiaca chronicles the history of Egypt from a mythical epoch of divine rulers, through the unification of Upper and Lower Egypt by Menes (c. 3100 BCE in modern dating) and the subsequent thirty (or thirty-one) dynasties, culminating in the establishment of the Ptolemaic Kingdom in 305 BCE. Key themes included the importance of a unified kingdom, periods of stability and innovation versus internal strife and foreign rule (like the Hyksos, Kushites, and Achaemenids), and the restoration of Egyptian power. Manetho aimed to present a comprehensive and continuous history of Egypt under divinely-sanctioned rulers, including foreign ones.


== Manetho's legacy ==
Manetho's unique legacy rests on the singular importance of his Aegyptiaca.


=== The dynastic framework ===
Manetho coined the term "dynasty" (Greek: dynasteia); his conception was not based on bloodlines—as we understand the term "dynasty" today—but rather as groupings of monarchs punctuated by discontinuities, either geographical (e.g., moving the capital) or genealogical. After each discontinuity came a new dynasty.
Arguably his most important legacy, Manetho's division of Egyptian rulers into thirty (or sometimes thirty-one) dynasties—despite its imperfections and the passage of millennia—still serves as the fundamental chronological backbone for Egyptology. Indeed, since Syncellus, his method of dynastic arrangement remains the foundational structure for all presentations of Pharaonic Egypt. 


=== Written in Greek ===
Use of Egyptian hieroglyphic and demotic writing began to disappear in the third century CE, and with it went the knowledge to read these scripts. The temple-based priesthoods died out and Egypt was gradually converted to Christianity, and because Egyptian Christians wrote in the Greek-derived Coptic alphabet, it came to supplant demotic. The last hieroglyphic text was written by priests at the Temple of Isis at Philae in 394 CE, and the last known demotic text was inscribed there in  452 CE.
Manetho's decision to write his Aegyptiaca in Greek—the lingua franca of his day—rather than Egyptian ensured that the text remained accessible even after the knowledge of Egyptian scripts was lost, and enabled scholars from classical and late antiquity to the modern era to encounter Egypt's deep past. This history would have otherwise been largely inaccessible until the decipherment of ancient Egyptian scripts.


=== A native Egyptian perspective ===
Manetho, an educated Egyptian who wrote for an audience of foreigners, is even today a singular guide to his civilization's profoundly ancient history. As the author of a complete and systematic work by a native Egyptian, Manetho's perspective held an inherent authority. His viewpoint still offers unparalleled insights into how Egyptians themselves conceived of their own past and their place in a changing world.


=== Foundation for later scholarship ===
Despite the fragmented and imperfect transmission of his Aegyptiaca, Manetho established a foundational chronology for thinking and writing about Egyptian history that endures to this day. For centuries, Manetho's fragments and summaries were the primary textual sources for understanding the sequence of Egyptian rulers. They provided a framework, however flawed, upon which early Egyptological scholarship was built. Jean-François Champollion relied on Manetho's king-lists as a cross-reference in his pioneering translations of ancient Egyptian scripts.


== See also ==

Aegyptiaca (Manetho)
Berossus
Cory’s Ancient Fragments
Fragmente der griechischen Historiker
Hecataeus of Abdera
List of lists of ancient kings
Menander of Ephesus


== References ==


=== Explanatory notes ===


=== Citations ===


=== Bibliography ===


=== Further reading ===


== External links ==