Galerius Valerius Maximinus, born as Daza (Ancient Greek: Μαξιμίνος; 20 November c. 270 – c. July 313), was Roman emperor from 310 to 313. In 305 his uncle Galerius admitted him to the Tetrarchy with the rank of caesar, a controversial appointment which helped start the civil wars of the Tetrarchy in the following year. Maximinus Daza claimed the title of augustus in 310, sharing and often contesting power with Licinius. A committed pagan, he engaged in one of the last persecutions of Christians, and was the last person to hold the title of Pharaoh of Egypt. In 313 Maximinus Daza openly turned against Licinius and was routed at the Battle of Tzirallum. He died during the subsequent retreat, shortly after publishing an edict of tolerance restoring the Christians' freedoms.


== Name ==
The emperor Maximinus was originally called "Daza", an ancient name with various unknown high distinction meanings in Illyria, where he was born. The form "Daia" given by the Christian writer Lactantius, an important source on the emperor's life, is considered a misspelling. He acquired the name "Maximinus" at the request of his maternal uncle, Galerius (a Roman emperor of Dacian origin). Modern scholarship often refers to him as "Maximinus Daza", though this particular form is not attested by epigraphic or literary evidence.


== Early career ==
He was born in the Roman Illyria region to the sister of emperor Galerius near their family lands around Felix Romuliana, in Roman Dacia, a rural area then also in the former Danubian region of Moesia, now modern Eastern Serbia. He later rose to high distinction after joining the Roman Army.
In 305, his maternal uncle Galerius became the eastern Augustus and adopted Maximinus as a son and heir, raising him to the rank of Caesar (that is, the junior eastern ruler), and granting him the government of Syria and Egypt.


== Civil war ==
In 308, after the elevation of Licinius to Augustus, Maximinus and Constantine I were declared filii Augustorum ("sons of the Augusti"), but Maximinus probably started styling himself as Augustus with support of his troops during a campaign against the Sassanids in 310. On the death of Galerius in 311, Maximinus divided the Eastern Empire between Licinius and himself. When Licinius and Constantine I began to make common cause, Maximinus entered into a secret alliance with the usurper Maxentius, who controlled Italy. He came to an open rupture with Licinius in 313; he summoned an army of 70,000 men but sustained a crushing defeat at the Battle of Tzirallum in the neighbourhood of Heraclea Perinthus on 30 April. He fled, first to Nicomedia and afterwards to Tarsus, where he died the following August.


== Persecution of Christians ==

Maximinus has a controversial name in Christian annals for renewing their persecution after the publication of the Edict of Toleration by Galerius, acting in response to the demands of various urban authorities asking to expel Christians. In one rescript replying to a petition made by the inhabitants of Tyre, transcribed by Eusebius of Caesarea, Maximinus expounds a pagan orthodoxy, explaining that it is through "the kindly care of the gods" that one could hope for good crops, health, and the peaceful sea, and that not being the case, one should blame "the destructive error of the empty vanity of those impious men [that] weighed down the whole world with shame". In one extant inscription (CIL III.12132, from Arycanda) from the cities of Lycia and Pamphylia asking for the interdiction of the Christians, Maximinus replied, in another inscription, by expressing his hope that "may those [...] who, after being freed from [...] those by-ways [...] rejoice [as] snatched from a grave illness".
After the victory of Constantine over Maxentius, however, Maximinus wrote to the Praetorian Prefect Sabinus that it was better to "recall our provincials to the worship of the gods rather by exhortations and flatteries". Eventually, on the eve of his clash with Licinius, he accepted Galerius' edict; after being defeated by Licinius, shortly before his death at Tarsus, he issued an edict of tolerance on his own, granting Christians the rights of assembling, of building churches, and the restoration of their confiscated properties.


== Pharaoh of Egypt ==

As Christianity continued to spread in Egypt, the title of Pharaoh was increasingly incompatible with the new religious movements. Maximinus's status as a non-Christian accorded the priests of Egypt an opportunity to style him as Pharaoh, in the same manner that other foreign rulers of Egypt had been styled before. That said, the Roman emperors themselves mostly ignored the status accorded to them by the Egyptians; and their role as god-kings was only ever acknowledged domestically by the Egyptians themselves. Maximinus would prove to be the last person afforded the traditional titulature of Pharaoh – no Christian Roman/Byzantine emperor, nor Islamic or modern leader, has revived the title since. As the last monarch to employ traditional pharaonic titulature, Maximinus' death can be seen as marking the end of a 3,400-year-old office.


== Death ==
Maximinus' death was variously ascribed "to despair, to poison, and to the divine justice".
Based on descriptions of his death given by Eusebius, and Lactantius as well as the appearance of Graves' ophthalmopathy in a Tetrarchic statue bust from Anthribis in Egypt sometimes attributed to Maximinus, endocrinologist Peter D. Papapetrou has advanced a theory that Maximinus may have died from severe thyrotoxicosis due to Graves' disease.
Maximinus was married at the time of his death, and he left behind an 8 year old son named Maximus and an unnamed 7 year old daughter.


== Eusebius on Maximinus ==
The Christian writer Eusebius claims that Maximinus was consumed by avarice and superstition. He also allegedly lived a highly dissolute lifestyle:

And he went to such an excess of folly and drunkenness that his mind was deranged and crazed in his carousals; and he gave commands when intoxicated of which he repented afterward when sober. He suffered no one to surpass him in debauchery and profligacy, but made himself an instructor in wickedness to those about him, both rulers and subjects. He urged on the army to live wantonly in every kind of revelry and intemperance, and encouraged the governors and generals to abuse their subjects with rapacity and covetousness, almost as if they were rulers with him.
Why need we relate the licentious, shameless deeds of the man, or enumerate the multitude with whom he committed adultery? For he could not pass through a city without continually corrupting women and ravishing virgins.
According to Eusebius, only Christians resisted him.

For the men endured fire and sword and crucifixion and wild beasts and the depths of the sea, and cutting off of limbs, and burnings, and pricking and digging out of eyes, and mutilations of the entire body, and besides these, hunger and mines and bonds. In all they showed patience in behalf of religion rather than transfer to idols the reverence due to God.
And the women were not less manly than the men in behalf of the teaching of the Divine Word, as they endured conflicts with the men, and bore away equal prizes of virtue. And when they were dragged away for corrupt purposes, they surrendered their lives to death rather than their bodies to impurity.
He refers to one high-born Christian woman who rejected his advances. He exiled her and seized all of her wealth and assets. Eusebius does not give the girl a name, but Tyrannius Rufinus calls her "Dorothea," and writes that she fled to Arabia. This story may have evolved into the legend of Dorothea of Alexandria. Caesar Baronius identified the girl in Eusebius' account with Catherine of Alexandria, but the Bollandists rejected this theory. Though, given Maximinus' previous persecutions of Christian's, there is doubt as to the credibility of Eusebius.


== Family tree ==


== See also ==
List of Roman emperors
Civil wars of the Tetrarchy


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Sources ==


== Further reading ==
Christensen, Torben (2012) [1974]. Müller, Mogens (ed.). C. Galerius Valerius Maximinus: Studies in the Politics and Religion of the Roman Empire AD 305–313 (PDF). Copenhagen University. ISBN 978-87-91838-48-4. OCLC 872060636.
Davis, Raymond (2015). "Maximinus, Gaius Galerius Valerius". Oxford Classical Dictionary. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.4022. ISBN 978-0-19-938113-5.
Seeck, Otto (1901). "Daia". In Wissowa, Georg (ed.). Realencyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft. Vol. IV.2. Stuttgart: Metzlerscher Verlag. columns 1986–1990.