Lia Purcell Smith (March 7, 2004 – October 18, 2025) was an American student at Middlebury College who died by suicide on October 18, 2025, at the age of 21. She was reported missing by her father on October 19, 2025, and her body was found by the Vermont State Police near Middlebury College's organic farm in Cornwall, Vermont, on October 24, 2025. Smith was a transgender woman who had been a member of the Middlebury Panthers women's swimming and diving team before leaving in 2023.


== Background ==
Smith was born on March 7, 2004, in Berkeley, California, to Gregory C. Smith and Keith E. Purcell, growing up in Woodside, California, and graduating from Sacred Heart Preparatory, a private Catholic school in Atherton. Smith received the Sean McLarry Fine Arts Scholarship Award at Sacred Heart in 2021, the Blue-Ribbon Award at Sacred Heart in 2022, and the Rotary Club of Menlo Park Academic Achievement Award in 2022. She volunteered as a teaching assistant at Peninsula Bridge, where she was awarded the Bronze Presidential Volunteer Service Award in 2022. From 2012 to 2023, Smith competed in diving competitions throughout the United States.

Smith was an openly transgender woman.
She attended Middlebury College in Middlebury, Vermont, majoring in computer science and statistics. She was a member of the college's chess, bridge, LGBTQ+, and Japanese clubs. She was set to graduate from college in 2026.
Smith was a diver on the Middlebury Panthers women's swimming and diving team. She began diving for the Panthers as a freshman, during the 2022–2023 season. She was one of her team's top performers, placing fifth overall off the 3-meter board during her rookie debut. She left the diving team the following year, citing difficulties competing as a transgender student athlete. The website and Twitter account called "HeCheated", which documents transgender women winning competitions designated for women in athletics, tracked and reported Smith's diving history, including revealing Smith's birth name. By February 2025, Middlebury College had removed Smith's diving team profile from their website, following the NCAA's ban on trans women athletes competing.
Following President Donald Trump's Executive Order 14201, which attempts to ban transgender women and girls from competing in women's sports, Smith spoke at a protest forum titled Trans Healthcare is NOT a Debate! in February 2025, stating that it was "really hard going in a locker room where you're not welcome, and there's really not a clear space that I should be going to" and that "we're [transgender people] not trying to get into women's spaces to be perverts.. we're just being ourselves. We don't mean any harm to anyone". She spoke up about having to undergo quarterly hormone checks to be able to compete.


== Death ==
Smith was last seen on the campus of Middlebury College on October 17, 2025. Her father reported her missing to the Middlebury Police Department on October 19, 2025. On October 23, 2025, an unidentified body was found in Cornwall, Vermont near The Knoll, Middlebury College's organic farm. Vermont State Police identified the body as Smith's on October 24, 2025. The Vermont Chief Medical Examiner's Offices determined the death was a suicide.


== Aftermath and reactions ==
Middlebury College president Ian Baucom released a statement following Smith's death, referring to her as "an articulate advocate of transgender rights". He offered condolences to the family and called Smith's death "a profound loss". Congresswoman Becca Balint (D-VT) issued a press release on October 27, 2025, mourning Smith's death. Katelyn Burns, writing in Teen Vogue, and journalist Erin Reed blamed anti-transgender policies for Smith's death.
A memorial service for Smith took place on November 2, 2025, at the Harman Assembly Hall at Sacred Heart Preparatory in Atherton. Smith's family requested for donations to be made to the Prism Center for Queer and Trans Life at Middlebury via a memorial website made in her honor.


== See also ==
List of suicides of LGBTQ people
Transgender health care § Mental health


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Reed, Erin (October 29, 2025). "Every Trans Suicide Is A Murder By Those In Power". Erin in the Morning. Retrieved October 31, 2025.