The Ghost Busters is a live-action children's sitcom that ran on CBS in 1975, about a team of bumbling detectives who investigate ghostly occurrences. The show reunited Forrest Tucker and Larry Storch in slapstick roles similar to their characters in F Troop, and featured a third actor, Bob Burns, in a gorilla suit as their partner. 
The series of fifteen episodes centered on the perpetual bumbling of the characters, good and evil alike. Character names referenced classic cinema, with both "Spencer" and "Tracy" alluding to actor Spencer Tracy, while "Kong" – not given to the gorilla – was a homage to King Kong.
After Columbia Pictures paid to license the Filmation series name for their (unrelated) 1984 film Ghostbusters, Filmation revived its series with an animated sequel in 1986.


== Premise ==
Spencer, Tracy, and Kong, bumbling paranormal detectives, billed themselves as "The Ghost Busters." Kong (Tucker) was the leader of the trio with Spencer (Storch) as his partner, and Tracy (a gorilla, played by Burns) as their assistant who also drove their barely-functional jalopy. Their headquarters was situated in a run down office building in an unspecified city. Outside of normal office equipment, plus a large armoire on which Tracy hung numerous hats including his trademark beanie with a propeller, the office itself was also dilapidated, with peeling wallpaper and a pay phone near the door as the Ghost Busters' only means of communicating with prospective clients. 
Spencer's name on the office door was misspelled "Spenser." His first name was given as Eddie in the second episode, "Dr. Whatsisname." Kong's first name was never mentioned in the original series. 
Each episode consisted of the same formula: in the pre-credits teaser, a ghost or monster- usually accompanied by a half-witted sidekick, would manifest and vow to wreak havoc or vengeance on a particular person, the city, or even the world. After the credits, Kong would send Tracy and Spencer to a general store to get their next assignment from the unseen "Zero" (voiced by Scheimer). The tape-recorded message was usually hidden inside an everyday object such as a bicycle, typewriter, or toy. In a parodic homage to Mission: Impossible, the recording would end with Zero saying, "This message will self-destruct in five seconds"; after Tracy counted down the seconds, the message- and often the item in which it was hidden, would explode in Tracy's face.
The Ghost Busters' assignments would invariably take them to the same place, a spooky castle with an adjoining graveyard on the city's outskirts; Kong would point out that the castle was the only one in or near the city.  After a series of farcical chases, the ghouls would be cornered and dispatched back to the netherworld by means of a "Ghost De-Materializer", usually activated by Kong as he triumphantly shouted "Zap!"


=== Ghosts and monsters ===
The show frequently made use of ghostly characters and other characters from popular and literary culture, as well as real-life historical figures. These included:

Dr. Frankenstein and his monster
A Mummy
The Red Baron
The Canterville Ghost
Count Dracula
Billy the Kid
Belle Starr
The captain and first mate of the Flying Dutchman


== Cast ==

Forrest Tucker as Jake Kong
Larry Storch as Eddie Spencer
Bob Burns as Tracy (credited as the gorilla's "trainer")
Lou Scheimer as the voice of Zero


=== Guest Star ===
Ted Knight as Simon de Canterville
Kathy Garver as Carola de Canterville
Lane Scheimer as Jesse James
Richard Balin as Paul Revere / Martian
Bob Burns as Construction Worker


=== Villains ===
Lane Scheimer as The Ghost
Johnny Brown as Fat-Man
Billy Barty as The Rabbit
Larry Storch as Big Al Caesar
Bernie Kopell as Dr. Frankenstein
William Engesser as Frankenstein's monster
Len Lesser as Mr. C
Dodo Denney as Sophia
Lennie Weinrib as Harry Albert
Stanley Adams as Cap'n Aloysius Beane
Phil Bruns as Scroggs
Tim Herbert as Phantom of Vaudeville
Brian Berlin as Elmo
Barbara Rhoades as Queen Forah
Richard Balin as Mummy
Ann Morgan Guilbert as Witches
Leigh Christian as Salem
Huntz Hall as Gronk
Marty Ingels as Billy the Kid
Brooke Tucker as Belle Starr
Dena Dietrich as Countess Dracula
Billy Holms as Count Dracula
Severn Darden as Dr. Jekyll
Joe E. Ross as Mr. Hyde
Howard Morris as The Red Baron
Robert Easton as Sparks
Jim Backus as Eric the Red
Lisa Todd as Brunhilda
Carl Ballantine as Merlin the Magician
Ina Balin as Morgan le Fay
Ronny Graham as Dr. Centigrade
Richard Balin as Abominable Snowman


== Production ==
In an interview conducted with Bob Burns III in 2007, he revealed that all 15 episodes were taped in a span of 9 weeks, every other day. Burns also revealed that the show did well enough in the ratings to warrant a second season, coming in at number two behind The Shazam!/ISIS Hour, but Filmation decided instead to put more money into its number-one program, thus canceling the show after one season. Though the series ended, reruns were broadcast for some time afterward.


== Episodes ==


== Home media ==
There were at least three VHS tapes released by Continental Video during the 1980s, where the show was billed as The Original Ghostbusters.
BCI Eclipse LLC, under its Ink & Paint classic animation entertainment label, under license from Entertainment Rights PLC, released the entire series on Region 1 DVD on April 17, 2007. The 2-DVD set presents the 15 live-action episodes uncut, re-mastered, transferred from the original broadcast videotapes, and presented in their original production order. It also contains extensive special features including interviews, photo galleries, rare footage and trailers from BCI's Ink & Paint brand. Unlike many of BCI Ink & Paint's other Filmation releases, this release appears to have been sourced from the original NTSC videotapes (the show having been recorded on tape rather than shot on film).
Australia received the complete series on DVD in a two-disc set on July 11, 2016. Mill Creek Entertainment has announced a DVD rerelease.


== Sequel ==

After the success of the 1984 Columbia Ghostbusters film, the Filmation show was revived in 1986 as an animated series, with Kong and Spencer's sons, Jake and Eddie Jr., inheriting their fathers' business (and Tracy the Gorilla) in Ghostbusters. 


== References ==


== External links ==
The Ghost Busters at IMDb
The Ghost Busters @ 70slivekidvid.com
Screencrush review of The Ghost Busters