The Last Sharknado: It's About Time is a 2018 American made-for-television science fiction comedy disaster film and the sixth installment in the Sharknado film series. The film was directed by Anthony C. Ferrante with Ian Ziering, Tara Reid and Cassie Scerbo reprising their roles from the previous installments. In the film, Fin and his gang use time travel in order to prevent sharknadoes from ever happening. A prequel is in development.


== Plot ==
With the Earth completely devastated from the global sharknado swarm, Fin Shepard and his adult son Gil time travel to the Cretaceous period in a bid to change the future and undo the destruction. Gil vanishes upon arrival, and a hologram he recorded earlier reveals that due to the instability of the energy needed to time travel, any individual person can only travel back in time once, with any subsequent trips back erasing their existence. Fin joins forces with his friends Nova and Bryan, as well as the still-human version of his wife April, all of whom were saved from their original deaths by Gil and sent back to await Fin's arrival. The group destroy the sharknado that appears with the help of a pterodactylus tamed by April, and use a time capacitor built into Gil's flight badge to return home, believing they have erased the sharknadoes from history.
However, the time vortex instead leads to medieval Camelot, with Bryan turning into a woman due to a temporal alteration. They meet Merlin, who reveals he has been helping the past version of Gil research a way to use sharknadoes for time travel; as a consequence of Gil searching for his parents throughout time, the sharknadoes have been unleashed across history. A sharknado forms and heads to the castle, but Fin destroys it with Excalibur after the past Gil uses it to time jump. The group's next jump leads to the American Revolutionary War, where they destroy a sharknado with aid from George Washington and Benjamin Franklin. Bryan, who returned to his original form after leaving Camelot, chooses to stay behind as Fin, Nova and April continue their quest.
The trio use a stagecoach to make the next leap, which brings them to the Old West town of Santa Mira. Their arrival allows Billy the Kid to escape arrest by the local sheriff, who detains Fin as an accomplice to Billy's crimes. This threatens to cause a catastrophic shift in the timeline, as Billy was meant to break Gil out of prison so he could reach the next sharknado. Nova and April meet up with Fin's ex-girlfriend Skye, who was also saved from her original death by Gil and sent back to await the others in Santa Mira. Together, they rescue Fin and Gil and allow the latter to make his time jump in the sharknado before destroying it with the eye lasers of April's robot counterpart's head from the previous timeline.
The group next travel to a 1950s beach party beset by a sharknado, which they destroy with aid from younger versions of Fin's parents Gilbert and Raye. They acquire a prototype time capacitor from the pair and attempt to go to July 11, 2013, to stop the Los Angeles sharknado, but Nova sabotages the capacitor to lead them to 1997 instead. She hopes to save her grandfather from dying in the shark attack that traumatized her as a child and successfully does so despite Fin's warnings, but ends up getting herself and April killed instead, while Robot April's head is lost in the ocean. Fin and Skye attempt another jump to 2013, but end up in 20013 instead, where Robot April has conquered the ruined world with flying sharks and an army of clones. Robot April explains that after her head was found by a fishing boat, she felt abandoned and spent the next 20,000 years creating a stable time machine she could use to force Fin into her future so they could be together forever. She freezes Skye and tempts Fin with clones of their children and Nova, but Fin refuses. The human April, who Robot April preserved as a genetic base for the clones, wakes up and fights with her, buying time for Fin to use the time machine himself.
Fin arrives in 2013 and lands on Captain Santiago's shark poaching boat right as the first sharknado forms. He discovers that Santiago found Robot April's head and intervenes to prevent her from turning evil, then helps the captain battle the sharknado. Robot April's future self arrives and tries to steal the capacitor from Fin, and their struggle damages the device, releasing a pulse that tears the fabric of reality. Time begins collapsing, creating a "timenado" that begins destroying the universe as it strikes throughout history. Robot April's head helps Fin destroy her future self, and he triggers her nuclear failsafe, sacrificing their lives to destroy the sharknado and repair time, thus creating a new universe.
In the new, sharknado-free timeline, all of the Shepard family and friends are alive. Fin and April run the bar with Nova, who now likes sharks, while April is pregnant with Gil. A television commercial reveals that Skye has become a politician and is a leading presidential candidate. Fin's daughter Claudia delivers Fin a letter from his father, who is in space and has sent his flight insignia as a gift for Gil's birth. Fin, who plans to retire to Kansas with April and Gil, delivers an emotional farewell speech to his friends and family. April goes into labor, and everyone rushes out of the bar to head to the hospital. As they leave, the television plays a broadcast of The Today Show with Al Roker reporting that there are no clouds in the sky at all, an occurrence that will likely never happen again.


== Cast ==


=== Principal cast ===
Ian Ziering as Fin Shepard
Tara Reid as April Wexler
Cassie Scerbo as Nova Clarke
Catarina Scerbo as young Nova
Judah Friedlander as Bryan
Debra Wilson as new Bryan
Vivica A. Fox as Skye


=== Supporting cast ===

Guest stars
20013
Chuck Hittinger as Matt Shepard
Ryan Newman as Claudia Shepard
Bar
Gary Busey as Wilford Wexler
Bo Derek as May Wexler
Mark McGrath as Martin Brody
Masiela Lusha as Gemini
John Heard as George (archive footage)


== Production ==
In February 2018, the film was confirmed to be released that summer to follow upon Sharknado 5's premiere, Tara Reid, Ian Ziering and Cassie Scerbo were set to return. On March 28, 2018, Syfy confirmed the film will be the final installment of the series.
On May 25, the film's title, The Last Sharknado: It's About Time was revealed by a teaser trailer.  A 30-second trailer was released on August 2. Vivica A. Fox, who had starred in Sharknado 2, also returned for the final installment.
Several other actors reprised their roles in cameos for the final scene of the movie, including Chuck Hittinger reappearing as Matt Shepard, replacing Cody Linley who had portrayed Matt in the fourth and fifth movies. Archival footage of John Heard, who portrayed George in the original film, was also used in tribute to the actor, who had died in July 2017.


== Reception ==
On Metacritic, the film has a score of 22 out of 100 based on reviews from 5 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". On Rotten Tomatoes it has a score of 27% based on reviews from 11 critics.


== Prequel ==
In November 2025, a prequel titled Sharknado Origins was announced to be in development. The film is planned for a Summer 2026 release and will follow Fin and April encountering a Sharknado as teenagers.


== References ==


== Notes ==


== External links ==

Official website
The Last Sharknado: It's About Time at IMDb
The Last Sharknado: It's About Time at Rotten Tomatoes
The Last Sharknado: It's About Time at Metacritic