Tutenstein is an American animated television series, produced by PorchLight Entertainment for Discovery Kids based on the comics by Jay Stephens. The series was first premiered on Discovery Kids' Saturday morning block on NBC on November 1, 2003. It ended on October 11, 2008. The series features young mummy Tutankhensetamun (based on real-life Tutankhamun and usually called "Tutenstein" as in the title) who is awakened about 3,000 years after his accidental death and now must face the fact that his kingdom is gone. The name is a portmanteau of Tutankhamun and Frankenstein.
Beginning in August 2020, Yippee TV, the current owners of the series, made the series officially available for streaming on YouTube.
In October 2022, it was announced that a reboot is currently in the works. It will have a completely new look. There has been no further information since then.


== Plot ==
Tutankhensetamun was an impulsive but kindhearted young Egyptian Pharaoh who lived a luxurious but short life. He died because back in Ancient Egypt he saved a friend of his from being smashed by rocks from a collapsing temple, so he himself was crushed to death. He carries the mighty Sceptre of Was, and the circumstances of his death are unknown at first.
In the 21st century, 12-year-old middle school student Cleo Carter accidentally witnesses his awakening after a bolt of lightning hits the mummified body of Tut that is on display at the local museum. She with her anthropomorphic pet cat Luxor must now help Tut to find his way around in the modern world. During the whole series, Set, god of disorder and violence, attempts to destroy Tut and gain possession of the Sceptre to become the ruler of all.


== Characters ==


=== Main ===
Tutankhensetamun, "Tutenstein", (voiced by Jeannie Elias in the first two seasons and early season 3 and Donna Cherry in the last four episodes), is a very impulsive but kind-hearted 10-year-old mummy who lives in the museum. His nickname, Tutenstein, is a play on words on Frankenstein. He is often visited by Cleo and Luxor.
Cleo Carter (voiced by Crystal Scales in the first two seasons and early season 3 and Leah Lynette in the last four episodes) is a 12-year-old African-American girl who wants to become an Egyptologist. After chasing her cat, Luxor, she accidentally brought Tut back to life. Her father is a well experienced Egyptologist and archeologist.
Luxor (voiced by Daran Norris in the first two seasons and David Lodge in season 3) is Cleo's pet cat. When Tut is resurrected, Luxor gains the capability of speech and becomes his self-appointed servant.


=== Supporting ===
Walter Jacobs (voiced by Joey Simmrin) is the easily frightened, friendly yet dimwitted, young security guard at the museum.
Professor Horace Behdety (voiced by Lex Lang) is a haughty professor and the cranky director of the museum. It is implied that Behdety discovered Tutankhensetamun's tomb.
Dr. Roxanne Vanderwheele (voiced by Jeannie Elias in the first two seasons and early season 3 and Cindy Robinson in the last four episodes) is Behdety's colleague, a bright young scholar and thoroughly modern archaeologist.
Rosalie Rivara (voiced by Candi Milo in the first two seasons and Wendee Lee in the third season) is a vain, publicity hungry television news reporter.
Natasha (voiced by Liza Del Mundo in the first two seasons and Wendee Lee in the third season) is Cleo's best friend with a bad habit of lying.
Kyle (voiced by Debi Derryberry in the first two seasons and Cindy Robinson in the third season) is one of Cleo's friends and has a crush on Natasha.
Jake (voiced by Justin Cowden) is one of Cleo's friends and her secret crush.
Iris Carter (voiced by Vanessa Marshall) is Cleo's mother and a construction engineer.


=== The Egyptian Gods ===
The almighty and responsible gods of ancient Egypt are often overseers of all the events of the immortal world and the underworld.

Set (voiced by Daran Norris in the first two seasons and David Lodge in season 3) is the Egyptian god of chaos, destruction, and disorder, who is the main antagonist. For thousands of years, he has been condemned to the darkest pit of the Egyptian underworld.
Sekhem (voiced by Roger Rose) and Khesef (voiced by Lex Lang) are two of the many demons who work for Set.
Apep (voiced by Cam Clarke) is a demon of the Egyptian underworld who takes the form of a giant water snake.
Ammut (voiced by Wendee Lee) is a demonic deity who devours the hearts of the dead.
Osiris (voiced by Daran Norris) is the Egyptian god of the afterlife, the underworld and rebirth who judges humans after their death.
Isis (voiced by Cindy Robinson) is the Egyptian goddess of magic, motherhood and wisdom. She is the wife of Osiris.
Ra (voiced by David Lodge) is the Egyptian god of the Sun. He is one of the most important figures in ancient Egyptian religion, since the Sun was sacred to them.
Horus (voiced by Jess Harnell) is the Egyptian god of kingship and the sky. He is the gods' greatest and most revered warrior.
Anubis (voiced by Lex Lang) is the Egyptian god of mummification, preparations and ceremonies for the dead. He works along with Thoth under Osiris to ensure order and bring balance to all the worlds.
Bastet (voiced by Wendee Lee) is the Egyptian goddess of cleanliness, the household and protector of cats.
Thoth (voiced by Michael Bell) is the Egyptian god of science, knowledge and writing. He works along with Anubis under Osiris to ensure order and bring balance to all the worlds.
Maat (voiced by Wendee Lee) is the Egyptian goddess of the concepts of truth, law, justice, order, balance, and harmony.
Nut (voiced by Michelle Ruff) is the Egyptian goddess of the sky and stars.
Geb (voiced by Michael Gough) is the Egyptian God of Earth.
Bennu is a sacred bird in ancient Egyptian mythology linked with the sun, creation, and rebirth.
Hathor (voiced by Kate Higgins) is the Egyptian goddess of joy, beauty, music and feminine love.
Sekhmet (voiced by Jeannie Elias) is the Egyptian goddess of battle, warfare and revenge. She is Hathor's wrathful alter ego.
Khnum
Mut
Bes is a minor ancient Egyptian deity worshipped as a protector of households, and in particular, of mothers, children and childbirth.
Hemsut
Ptah
Serket is the Egyptian goddess of nature, animals, medicine and healing from venom/poison.
Sobek is the Egyptian god of the Nile river, associated with pharaonic power, fertility, and military prowess.
Wadjet is the Egyptian goddess of protection. Her symbol is used by royalty to guard them from evil both during their mortal life and in the afterlife.
Imhotep is an Egyptian chancellor to the pharaoh Djoser, probable architect of the step pyramid, and high priest of the sun god Ra at Heliopolis.
Atum is the Egyptian god of creation and life, said to have made the first humans out of clay.


== Episodes ==


=== Series overview ===


=== Season 1 (2003–04) ===


=== Season 2 (2004–05) ===


=== Season 3 (2006–07) ===
Note: All episodes in this season were directed by Norton Virgien.


=== Television film (2008) ===


== Production ==
ABN reported "with regard to the ongoing theme of ancient temples and history found in his animated shows Tutenstein and The Secret Saturdays, [Jay] Stephens quips, "I'm a nerd. I like reading about history and mythology. And the past is full of surprises." Stephens spent many years developing the show for television, coming up with the new setting and cast of characters that diverged significantly from the original comics. Stephens became the creative consultant of the show, with character designer Fil Barlow reinterpreting the look of the entire series. Barlow was the production designer until his contracted 20 episodes expired and was fired. His successor was his student, Thomas Perkins.
The production company, PorchLight Entertainment, which is based in Los Angeles, California, has won Emmys for the first and second seasons of the series. Irish TV production company Telegael, which is based in An Spidéal, Co Galway, also won an Emmy Award for the second season.


== Historical accuracy ==
Many of the gods portrayed in the series resemble their historical portrayals and all the Egyptian myths mentioned in the show are genuine. The Scepter of Was being portrayed as an all-purpose magic wand is fictional, though the Was itself is a genuine Egyptian symbol. Unlike Tutankhamun, who died at the age of 19, Tutenstein (Tutahnkensetamun) died when he was 10. However, Tutankhamun did become pharaoh at the age of 9, although the show doesn't say what age Tutenstein became pharaoh. On the other hand, Tutenstein is drawn with a cleft lip, just like the real Tutankhamun. The ancient game senet did exist, but as no precise rules for the game have been preserved, the rules as shown in the series are not accurate. Egyptologist Kasia Szpakowska served as a consultant to the series.


== Critical reception ==
Common Sense Media gave the show a rating of 3 stars out of 5, saying "The character of Tut is amusing, with his combination of childishness and egotism, and his interaction with Cleo and Luxor can be quite funny. The resolutions of the stories are fairly predictable – Tut uses his powers for good to help his friends, and harmony is restored – but the situation is unusual enough to keep the show fresh." DVD Verdict said "To be fair, as a product of the Discovery Channel, the producers have tried something slightly different with Tutenstein. Its educational children's programming, the attempt of an educational station to compete with more popular stations. Each episode incorporates some educational tidbits: explaining aspects of ancient Egyptian mythology and history. Unfortunately, the learning gets a bit mixed up with all the other nonsense." The Sydney Morning Herald wrote "It's The Mummy for kids... There's no Brendan Fraser or Rachel Weisz here, but the humorous dialogue – and the inclusion of a talking cat – should be a winner among younger viewers."


=== Awards and nominations ===


== Broadcast ==
The series aired on Discovery Kids and premiered in the United States on November 1, 2003 (along with Kenny the Shark). The final episode aired on January 13, 2007. A TV movie entitled Tutenstein: Clash of the Pharaohs aired on October 11, 2008, ending the series. After the series ended, reruns continued to air on The Hub until December 30, 2012.
In August 2003, Fox Kids Europe acquired the show's television, home video and consumer products rights for Europe, Israel, India and French-speaking Africa from PorchLight, with Buena Vista International Television servicing television distribution. Following the rebrand of the company as Jetix Europe in 2004, the series premiered on the European Jetix networks around that time.
In 2004 the series had its British terrestrial television debut on ITV – first as part of the Saturday morning children's program Ministry of Mayhem, and later in a weekday afternoon slot on CITV, where it was one of the highest-rating shows for kids aged 4–15.
It also aired on Nickelodeon and ABC in Australia, and Maxi TV in Turkey.
In East and Southeast Asia, it aired on Disney Channel.
Beginning on August 18, 2020, the series was officially made available for streaming on YouTube without charge by Yippee TV.
The series, with the exception of the third season, and television special are also available for streaming on Hoopla. The series is also available on the Common Sense Media-owned streaming service Sensical.


== References ==


== External links ==
Tutenstein at IMDb