The Alpine Convention is an international territorial treaty for the sustainable development of the Alps. The objective of the treaty is to protect the natural environment of the Alps while promoting its development. This Framework Convention involves the European Union and the eight Alpine states (Austria, Germany, France, Italy, Liechtenstein, Monaco, Slovenia, and Switzerland). Opened to signature in 1991 and consisting of a Framework Convention, various implementation protocols and declarations, it entered into force in 1995, contributing to reinforce the recognition of special qualities and specific characteristics of the Alps, going beyond national boundaries and seeking international action.


== Geographic area of the Alpine Convention ==

The geographic area of the Alpine Convention covers a 190,717 km2 or 73,636 sq mi encompassing 5867 municipalities (data from 2013). The Alpine Range as defined by the Alpine Convention stretches across 1,200 km or 746 mi, through eight states, and its maximum width is 300 km or 186 mi, between Bavaria and Northern Italy. The entire territories of Monaco and Liechtenstein are included. Austria and Italy together represent more than 55% of the convention area. With France, these three states cover the three-quarter of the total surface of the Alpine Convention territory. In 2013, the total population of this area was approaching 15 million inhabitants.


== The Institutions of the Alpine Convention ==


=== The Alpine Conference ===
The Alpine Conference is the body that takes the most important decisions on behalf of the convention. The conference is held at the end of each two-year presidency of the Alpine Convention, which rotates between the contracting parties. The conference is chaired by the current presidency, for the period 2022–2024 the presidency is held by Slovenia.
All the Alpine Conferences:


=== The Permanent Committee ===
The permanent committee is the executive body of the Alpine Convention. It is composed of all member delegations and guarantees that the basis, the principles and the objectives of the convention are implemented.
The permanent committee analyses the information submitted by the member states in implementing the convention and reports to the Alpine Conference; prepares programs for meetings of the Alpine Convention and proposes the agenda; sets up working groups that have to formulate Protocols and recommendations and it coordinates their activities; examines and harmonizes the contents of draft Protocols and makes proposals to the Alpine Conference.
The permanent committee meets twice a year.


=== The Compliance Committee ===
The compliance committee is the body that oversees implementation of the commitments and obligations taken under the Alpine Convention. Every 10 years, Contracting Parties have to publish a report concerning the implementation of the convention and its protocols. The first report was adopted at the Xth Alpine Conference (March 2009).


=== The Permanent Secretariat ===
The permanent secretariat, created in 2003, supports all the other bodies of the Alpine Convention by providing logistic and administrative support, and by helping the Contracting parties, especially in implementing projects. The secretariat has its main office in Innsbruck, Austria, and a branch office in Bolzano-Bozen, Italy, and  is headed by a secretary general, currently Alenka Smerkolj.


=== Thematic Working Bodies ===
The permanent committee can establish thematic working bodies, with two-year mandates, on topics it considers relevant to support sustainable development within the Alps. The main responsibility of these working groups is the development of new protocols, recommendations and implementation measures, studies of ongoing developments and reports on the progress to the Alpine Conference and permanent committee.
Nine working groups and platforms are currently active:

Working Group Transport
Natural Hazards Platform
Ecological Network Platform
Water Management Platform in the Alpine space
Large Carnivores and Wild Ungulates and Society Platform – WISO
Working Group "Macro-regional strategy for the Alps"
"Mountain Farming" Platform
"Mountain Forest" Working group
Expert Group -Report from the State of the Alps-
Working groups active in the past were:

Working Group UNESCO World Heritage
Working Group "Demography and Employment"
"Sustainable tourism" Working group


== Framework Convention and its Protocols ==
The first meeting of interested countries took place in Berchtesgaden in December 1989. On 7 November 1991 the Framework Convention was signed by Austria, Germany, France, Italy, Liechtenstein and Switzerland. Slovenia signed on 29 March 1993 and Monaco on 20 December 1994. Ratification occurred between 1994 and 1999.
Below is a brief overview about the signatures and the state of ratification:

To date, Alpine states have signed all the protocols, except Monaco that did not sign the protocol 'Energy' and the European Union that did not sign the protocols 'Mountain Forests' and 'Settlement of disputes'. Regarding protocol ratification, Switzerland has not ratified any protocols yet.


== Protocols and Declarations linked to the Framework Convention ==
Under the convention, Member States should adopt specific measures in twelve thematic areas (Population and Culture, Spatial Planning, Air pollution, Soil Conservation, Water Management, Conservation of Nature and the Countryside, Mountain Farming, Mountain Forests, Tourism, Transport, Energy, and Waste Management). Of these areas, eight are now protocols annexed to the Framework Convention:

Spatial Planning and Sustainable Development;
Mountain Farming;
Conservation of Nature and Landscape Protection;
Mountain Forests;
Tourism;
Soil Conservation;
Energy;
Transports.
Two new protocols, not related to a specific thematic area, have since been adopted:

Settlement of disputes;
Adherence of the Principality of Monaco to the Alpine Convention.
The Alpine Convention includes two Declarations that could not be turned into Protocols:

Declaration on Population and Culture;
Declaration on Climate Change.


== Publications of the Permanent Secretariat of the Alpine Convention ==
Main source:

Alpine Signals 1. The Alpine Convention- Reference guide, 2010, second edition, available in English, German, French, Italian and Slovenian.
Alpine Signals 2. The Alpine Convention is taking shape, 2004, available in German, French, Italian and Slovenian.
Alpine Signals 3. Cross-border ecological network, 2004, available in German, French, Italian and Slovenian.
Alpine Signals 4. Natural events documentation, 2006, available in German, French, Italian and Slovenian.
Alpine Signals 5. Mitigation and adaptation to climate change in the Alpine Space, 2008
Alpine Signals 6
Report on the State of the Alps #1. Transport and Mobility, 2007
Report on the State of the Alps #2. Water and water management issues, 2009
Report on the State of the Alps #3. Sustainable rural development and innovation, 2011
Report on the State of the Alps #4. Sustainable tourism in the Alps, 2013
Report on the State of the Alps #5. Demographic changes in the Alps, 2015
Report on the State of the Alps #6. Greening the economy in the Alpine region, 2017
Towards Renewable Alps Archived 11 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Towards Renewable Alps, 2017
Multi-Annual Work Programme of the Alpine Conference 2017–2022. Multi-Annual Work Programme of the Alpine Conference 2017–2022, 2017
The Alps-Eight countries, a single territory, 2009; second edition, 2016
PER ALPES. Discovering the Alps in 20 circular walks, 2010
THE ALPS. People and pressures in the mountains, the facts at a glance. Vademecum, 2010
Establishing an Alpine Ecological Network, 2007
Alpine Signals FOCUS 1
Implementation manuals of the Alpine Convention and best practice
Environmental Protection and Mountains


== See also ==
List of national parks of the Alps
Alpine Space Programme, an EU co-funded programme to enhance the competitiveness and attractiveness of the alpine region
European Landscape Convention
Alpine Town of the Year
Via Alpina


== References ==


== External links ==
Alpine Convention
Alpine Convention Atlas
Alpine Climate Board
CIPRA-International
YPAC (Youth Parliament to the Alpine Convention)
Alliance in the Alps
Carpathian Convention
International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River