The Asilomar International Conference on Climate Intervention Technologies was a conference developed by Margaret Leinen of the Climate Response Fund and chaired by Michael MacCracken of the Climate Institute. The conference took place in March 2010 and the recommendations were published in November 2010. The goal was to identify and minimize the risks involved with climate engineering (geoengineering, or climate intervention), and was based on the 1975 Asilomar Conference on Recombinant DNA which discussed the potential biohazards and regulation of biotechnology. A group of over 150 scientist and engineers gathered together with lawyers, environmentalists and disaster relief workers in an open meeting to avoid accusations of conspiracy  during this discussion. The Asilomar Conference focused exclusively on the development of risk reduction guidelines for climate intervention experiments.


== Goals of the conference ==
Identify potential risks associated with climate intervention experiments
Propose a system to assess experiment design for potential categorical risks and suggest precautions to assure their safe conduct
Propose voluntary standards for climate intervention research for the international scientific community


== Recommendations ==
The core rationale for pursuit of climate engineering research is to advance the collective well-being of society and the environment;
Climate engineering research is internationally planned and coordinated;
Appropriately scoped governmental oversight, public involvement, and decision-making takes place during consideration and conduct of planned activities;
Transparency and exchange of research plans, data, and findings minimize the need for environmentally disruptive experiments and maximize the learning from experiments that are conducted; and
Regular, independent evaluation and assessment of the extent of understanding and uncertainty is carried out to provide optimal information and confidence for the public and policymakers 


== Steering committee ==
Michael C. MacCracken (chair), Climate Institute, USA
Scott Barren, Columbia University, USA
Roger Barry, World Data Center for Glaciology and University of Colorado, USA
Paul Crutzen (corresponding member), Max Planck Institute, Germany, and Scripps Institution of Oceanography, USA
Steven Hamburg, Chief Scientist, Environmental Defense Fund, USA
Richard Lampitt, National Oceanography Centre and University of Southampton, UK
Diana Liverman, University of Arizona, US, and Oxford University, UK
Thomas Lovejoy, H. John Heinz III Center for Science, Economics and the Environment, USA
Gordon McBean, The University of Western Ontario, Canada
John Shepherd, National Oceanography Centre, University of Southampton, and Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, UK
Stephen Seidel, Pew Center on Global Climate Change, USA
Richard Somerville, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego, USA
Tom M. L. Wigley, University of Adelaide, Australia 


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Kintisch, E. (2010). "'Asilomar 2' Takes Small Steps Toward Rules for Geoengineering". Science. 328 (5974): 22–23. doi:10.1126/science.328.5974.22. PMID 20360071.
Madrigal, Alexis. "Climate Hackers Want to Write Their Own Rules". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 21 August 2022.
Tollefson, Jeff (8 November 2010). "Asilomar geoengineering conference report released". nature.com. Retrieved 21 August 2022.


== External links ==
Asilomar International Conference on Climate Intervention Technologies, 2010, Climate Response Fund
The Asilomar Conference Recommendations on Principles for Research into Climate Engineering Techniques. Conference Report