The Atlas bear or North African bear (Ursus arctos crowtheri) is an extinct population (or populations) of brown bears native to North Africa until their extinction in 1870.


== Range ==
The Atlas bear was Africa's only native bear sub-species that survived into modern times. Once inhabiting the Atlas Mountains and neighbouring areas, from Morocco to Libya, the animal is now thought to be extinct.

Herodotus, who traveled to North Africa, describes their existence near Lake Tritonis (Chott Melghir and Chott ldjerid) as follows:"The country of the Maxyes, and the rest of the western part of Libya, is much fuller of wild beasts and more wooded than the country of the nomads...is exceedingly mountainous and wooded and full of wild beasts. In that country are the huge snakes and the lions, and the elephants and bears and asps"


== Description ==
The Atlas bear was brownish-black in colour and lacked a white mark on the muzzle. The fur was 4–5 inches (102–127 mm) long and was reddish-orange on the underparts. The muzzle and claws were shorter than those of the American black bear, though it was stouter and thicker in body. The Atlas bear was said to have been 9 feet (2.7 m) long and weighed up to 1,000 pounds (450 kg).


== Genetics ==
A mitochondrial DNA study of bones of Atlas bears ranging in age from 10,000 to 1280 years Before Present found that the specimens belonged to two distinct clades: one, referred to as "Clade V", was indistinguishable from brown bears found in the Iberian Peninsula, while the other, "Clade VI", was highly distinct from all other brown bears, either closely related to the polar bear and Alaskan brown bears or outside the group that contains all other brown bear mitochondrial lineages.
Atlas bears do not appear to be closely related to Middle Eastern brown bear populations, despite geographic proximity, which suggests that the colonization of North Africa by brown bears was an event of considerable antiquity.


== Ecology ==
The Atlas bear's ecology is presumed to be similar to that of the other brown bears. The Atlas bear was said to have been mostly herbivorous, feeding on  roots, acorns and nuts. However, since most bears today are omnivores, the Atlas bear is believed to have been able to eat meat as well. It was believed that, if it did eat meat, it probably ate small mammals as well as carrion while scavenging. Sympatric predators included the Barbary leopard and Barbary lion.


== Extinction ==
The Atlas bear became extinct shortly after modern firearms were developed. Over-hunting may have contributed to their decline. The Atlas bear finally became extinct in the late 19th century; the last one recorded to be killed by hunters was in 1870 in the Tetouan Mountains in northern Morocco. Human activity can definitely be said to have played a large role in causing the extinction of the Atlas bear.
The alleged 19th century accounts have been questioned by various zoologists such as Ángel Cabrera and Michel Thévenot, who emphasized the complete lack of physical evidence and bear tracks found. Additionally, the most recent fossil remains are from the 8th century putting doubt on the alleged 1870 extinction date.


== See also ==
List of African animals extinct in the Holocene
Agriotherium africanum


== References ==

Day, David (1981). The Doomsday Book of Animals: A Natural History of Vanished Species. Viking Press. pp. 168–170. ISBN 0-670-27987-0.
"Bears of the Last Frontier, Hour One: City of Bears: Brown Bear Fact Sheet". www.pbs.org. Web. 23 Oct. 2014.
"The Animal Files". www.theanimalfiles.com. Web. 23 Oct. 2014.
"Brown Bear- Ursus Arctos". The National Park Service. www.nps.gov. Web. 23 Oct. 2014.


== External links ==

"Atlas bear". The Encyclopedia of Life.