The Environmental Conservation Trust of Uganda (ECOTRUST) is a non-governmental organization and non-profit organization established in Uganda in 1999. The organization focuses on conserving biological diversity and enhancing social welfare through sustainable environmental management practices. ECOTRUST works on a principle of  delivering conservation funds and finances.


== History ==
ECOTRUST was established in 1999 with the primary mission to address the nexus between biodiversity conservation and community welfare in Uganda. The organization works to combine conservation of natural resources with livelihoods improvement for local communities.


== Overview ==
Established in 1999, ECOTRUST operates national wide within Uganda with its concentration on three main landscapes with the country which are; Murchison-Semliki landscape in the Albertine region of South-Western Uganda, Queen Elizabeth National Park landscape and Mount Elgon Landscape in Eastern Uganda. All these are internationally recognized as biodiversity significance landscapes. These Landscapes are also zones for climate change induced disasters like floods, mud slides and changing weather patterns which cause frequent and unexpected droughts and prolonged rainy seasons.


== Mission and activities ==
The organization's core mission is to conserve biological diversity and enhance social welfare by promoting innovative and sustainable environmental management practices. ECOTRUST deploys conservation incentives in ways that enable the organization to consider investments that traditional conservation organizations cannot. The trust works with different communities and stakeholders across Uganda to conserve natural resources and biodiversity while supporting local livelihoods. The organization works nationwide within Uganda with concentration on three main landscapes: the Murchison-Semliki landscape in the Albertine region, Queen Elizabeth National Park landscape, and Mount Elgon landscape in Eastern Uganda.


== Partnerships ==
The World Land Trust (WLT) is one of the funders of ECOTRUST which funded supported the establishment of a Corridor Restoration Fund (CRF) that drove the restoration of forest connectivity corridors between Bugoma and Budongo forest reserves in the Murchison Landscape of Western Uganda the so called Bugoma-Budongo Corridor).
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC) and the Ministry of Water & Environment (MWE) funded ECOTRUST under a project called Restoration of Wetlands and Associated Catchments (ADA) Project in Eastern Uganda. This project was conducted in five districts that have direct access to Lake Kyoga; Butaleja, Budaka, Kibuku, Namutumba, and Kaliro. The organization is also featured on various conservation platforms and databases that track restoration efforts across Africa.


== Organizational values ==
ECOTRUST core values are Accountability to ourselves, to the organization, and to the people they work with, Transparency where their success is based on building Trust, Integrity , Excellence and Teamwork.


== See also ==
Environmental issues in Uganda
Conservation in Uganda
Ngamba Island Chimpanzee Sanctuary


== External links ==
Official website


== References ==