H2Pro is an Israeli startup company that is developing cheaper hydrogen fuel produced by sustainable energy. The company was co-founded in 2019 by Gideon Grader, Avner Rothschild, Hen Dotan and Talmon Marco. H2Pro has received backing from Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates and from Hong Kong entrepreneur Li Ka-shing. In 2019, Hyundai invested in H2Pro.  More recently ArcelorMittal made a US$5 million investment in H2Pro via its XCarb innovation fund.


== Decoupled Water Electrolysis (DWE) ==
H2Pro's electrolysis technology is based on a method known as Decoupled Water Electrolysis (DWE), which separates the hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions in time rather than space. Unlike conventional electrolysis methods that produce hydrogen and oxygen simultaneously at different electrodes, DWE operates in two distinct phases. H2Pro's proprietary DWE method employs a bifunctional electrode and a “battery-like” electrode that charges and discharges. In phase one, hydrogen is generated at the bifunctional electrode while the battery electrode charges - transforming from nickel hydroxide to nickel oxyhydroxide. No oxygen is released in this step, eliminating the risk of gas mixing. In phase two, the current is reversed. Oxygen is produced at the bifunctional electrode while the battery electrode discharges - converting back from nickel oxyhydroxide to nickel hydroxide. No hydrogen is released during this phase.
This membrane-less, temporally separated process enables greater operational flexibility, improved safety, and high efficiency under intermittent power conditions. Although individual DWE cells alternate between hydrogen and oxygen generation, multiple cells are operated in parallel to ensure continuous overall gas production.


== Efficiency ==
The scientific paper detailing the two-step electrolysis process, on which the company's technology is based, reports an average 98.7% voltage efficiency–not to be confused with energy conversion efficiency: the electrical energy consumption is 39.9 kWh per kilogram hydrogen, with an additional heat loss of 1.9 kWh per kg hydrogen, not including heat loss to the environment. Out of approximately 33.3 kWh of usable energy per kg hydrogen, this gives the two-step electrolysis process a theoretical maximum energy efficiency of approximately 79.6 percent for storing electrical energy in hydrogen. The energy then needs to be converted back to electricity, which in practice, using fuel cells, results in further energy losses.


== References ==