The List of World Heritage in Danger is compiled by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) through the World Heritage Committee according to Article 11.4 of the World Heritage Convention, established in 1972 to designate and manage World Heritage Sites. Entries in the list are threatened World Heritage Sites whose conservation requires major operations and for which "assistance has been requested". The list is intended to increase international awareness of the threats and to encourage counteractive measures. Threats to a site can be either proven imminent threats or potential dangers to a site.
For natural sites, ascertained dangers include the serious decline in the population of an endangered or other valuable species or the deterioration of natural beauty or scientific value of a property caused by human activities such as logging, pollution, settlement, mining, agriculture or major public works. For cultural properties, they include serious deterioration of materials, structure, ornaments or architectural coherence and the loss of historical authenticity or cultural significance. Potential dangers for both cultural and natural sites include development projects, armed conflicts, insufficient management systems or changes in the legal protective status of the properties. For cultural sites, gradual changes due to geology, climate or environment can also be potential dangers.
Before a property is inscribed on the List of World Heritage in Danger, its condition is assessed and a potential programme for corrective measures is developed in cooperation with the State Party involved. The final decision about inscription is made by the committee. Financial support from the World Heritage Fund may be allocated by the committee for listed properties. The state of conservation is reviewed yearly, after which the committee may request additional measures, delete the property from the list if the threats have ceased or consider deletion from both the List of World Heritage in Danger and the World Heritage List. Of the three former UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the Dresden Elbe Valley and the Liverpool Maritime Mercantile City were delisted after placement on the List of World Heritage in Danger while the Arabian Oryx Sanctuary was directly delisted. Some sites have been designated as World Heritage Sites and World Heritage in Danger in the same year, such as the Church of the Nativity, traditionally considered to be the birthplace of Jesus.
In some cases, danger listing has sparked conservation efforts and prompted the release of funds, benefitting sites such as the Galápagos Islands and Yellowstone National Park, both later removed from the List of World Heritage in Danger. Despite this, the list itself and UNESCO's implementation of it have been the focus of criticism. In particular, States Parties and other stakeholders of World Heritage Sites have questioned the authority of the committee to declare a site in danger without their consent. Until 1992, when UNESCO set a precedent by placing several sites on the danger list against their wishes, States Parties would have submitted a programme of corrective measures before a site could be listed. Instead of being used as intended, the List of World Heritage in Danger is perceived by some states as a black list and according to Christina Cameron, Professor at the School of Architecture, Canada Research Chair on Built Heritage, University of Montreal, has been used as political tool to get the attention of States Parties. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) notes that UNESCO has referenced the List of World Heritage in Danger (without actually listing the site) in a number of cases where the threat could be easily addressed by the State Party. The Union also argues that long keeping a site listed as endangered is questionable and that other mechanisms for conservation should be sought in these cases.
As of November 2025, there are 53 entries (14 natural, 39 cultural) on the List of World Heritage in Danger. Arranged by the UNESCO regions, 22 of the listed sites are in the Arab States, 12 in Africa, six in Latin America and the Caribbean, six in Asia and the Pacific, and seven in Europe and North America. The majority of the endangered natural sites (9) are in Africa. The list encompasses sites that have been identified as facing threats to their integrity, which could stem from natural disasters, armed conflict, neglect, pollution, unsustainable tourism, or other dangers. Among the sites, the impacts of armed conflict are evident in countries like Syria, with several sites, including the Ancient City of Aleppo and the Ancient Villages of Northern Syria, endangered due to the Syrian Civil War. In Africa, the Democratic Republic of the Congo sees multiple listings due to threats like military conflict and environmental degradation affecting its national parks.


== Current list ==


== Previously listed sites ==
A number of sites were previously listed as being in danger, but later removed from the list after improvements in management and conservation. The Everglades National Park was listed from 1993 to 2007 and has been again since 2010; the Río Plátano Biosphere Reserve was listed from 1996 to 2007 and has been again since 2011: both are therefore included in the list of currently listed sites (above).


== See also ==
Former UNESCO World Heritage Sites
World Heritage Sites by country
List of World Heritage Sites by year of inscription
Lists of World Heritage Sites
Cultural heritage sites at risk from climate change


== Notes ==


== References ==


=== Citations ===


=== General ===
"World Heritage in Danger: A compendium of key decisions on the conservation of natural World Heritage properties via the List of World Heritage in Danger" (PDF). Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. 2009. Retrieved 3 September 2011.
Chape, Stuart; Spalding, Mark; Jenkins, Martin (2008). The world's protected areas: status, values and prospects in the 21st century (illustrated ed.). University of Castile-La Mancha. ISBN 978-0-520-24660-7. Retrieved 3 September 2011.
Timothy, Dallen J.; Nyaupane, Gyan P. (2009). Cultural heritage and tourism in the developing world: a regional perspective. Contemporary geographies of leisure, tourism and mobility. Vol. 10 (illustrated ed.). Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-415-77622-6. Retrieved 3 September 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Eighth session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Sixteenth session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 28 May 2010.
"World Heritage Committee: Twentieth session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Twenty-first session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 28 May 2010.
"World Heritage Committee: Twenty-third session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Twenty-fourth session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Twenty-fifth session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Twenty-seventh session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Twenty-eighth session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Twenty-ninth session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Thirtieth session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Thirty-first session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Thirty-third session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.
"World Heritage Committee: Thirty-fourth session" (PDF). UNESCO. Retrieved 26 June 2011.


== External links ==
UNESCO World Heritage Sites, official site
UNESCO World Heritage Centre – World Heritage in Danger List, official site
UNESCO Heritage Centre – World Heritage List, official site