Lunavi, formerly Green House Data, is a data center and managed services provider headquartered in Cheyenne, Wyoming, United States.
Cheyenne is home to a campus with 45,000 square feet of data center space, as well as administrative and technical support offices. The company has additional data center locations in Washington, Colorado, Oregon, Georgia, Texas, New Jersey, and New York, with sales and marketing offices in Laramie and in Denver, Colorado. As of 2019, the company also operates an IT consulting focused office in Toronto, Ontario.


== History ==
Green House Data was founded in 2007, starting as a colocation and cloud hosting provider. The company was co-founded by Shawn Mills and Cortney Thompson.
In April 2015, the company acquired FiberCloud, a Seattle, Washington-based provider of colocation, cloud hosting, and other data center services. With this acquisition, Green House Data added three data centers in Washington state, as well as nearly 20 employees and several hundred customers.
In April 2017, the company acquired Cirracore, a cloud-focused infrastructure provider based in Atlanta, Georgia. In November 2017, the company acquired Ajubeo, a cloud hosting service provider based in Denver.
Green House Data announced a merger via acquisition of Infront Consulting Group in May 2018.
In 2020, the company rebranded itself from Green House Data to Lunavi.
Lunavi worked with i-Function to develop an internet-based tool to detect early Alzheimer's. 


== Sustainable energy ==
As a whole, the data center industry has been highly criticized for heavy electrical use, and in recent years has actively tried to reduce power consumption by improving facility design and increasing server virtualization. In 2013, Green House Data was part of EPA's "Leadership Club" for sustainable power purchases.
Beginning in 2014, Green House Data was the first company to participate in WyoRECs, the first renewable energy credit program based out of Wyoming.
In April 2015, Green House Data joined the EPA's Top 30 Tech & Telecom list of the largest green power users, retiring over 8 million kilowatt-hours (kWh) of green power annually. By 2017, the company moved up 5 places on the list, retiring 20,270,000 kWhs.


== Data Centers ==
Green House Data operates a total of seven data center facilities in five geographic regions. There are cloud and colocation data centers in Atlanta, GA, Cheyenne, WY, Seattle, WA, and Bellingham, WA and cloud data centers in Dallas, TX, Denver, CO, and Orangeburg, NY. In March 2016, the company announced a "Hear from a Human" technical support service guarantee, which Fortune called more characteristic of a "boutique cloud."
The Seattle facility is located within the Westin Building, the 3rd largest carrier hotel in the United States. The Westin Building data center consists of the 18th, 19th, and 32nd floors, with participation in the Seattle Internet Exchange.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website