Nathan Méténier (born June 13, 1999) is a French climate and environmental activist. He was one of the youngest members of the United Nations first Youth Advisory Group on Climate Change from 2020 to 2022, and is the founder of Generation Climate Europe, the largest coalition of youth-led networks at the European level, pushing for stronger action from the EU on climate and environmental issues.


== Life ==
Nathan Méténier grew up in Grenoble, in the French Alps where he could observe the effect of climate change first hand. He declared: “I’ve seen the changes, I’ve seen the ice disappearing and the collapse on the Mont Blanc”
He has worked for and has been involved in many organisations and movements notably as Regional Director of Youth4Nature and spokesperson of Youth and Environment Europe. He graduated from Grenoble Institute of Political Studies. He is studying at the London School of Economics.
From 2019 to 2021, Méténier was on the Board of Youth and Environment Europe.  He is founder and coordinator of Generation Climate Europe. He is ambassador for Youth4Nature. He is the founder of Generation Climate Europe, the largest coalition of youth-led networks at the European level, pushing for stronger action from the EU on climate and environmental issues. 
In July 2020, until 2022, Méténier was named by United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres to the first iteration of the Youth Advisory Group on Climate Change, a group of seven young climate leaders to advise him on action for the climate crisis for a period of two years. Méténier was one of the youngest in the group, which ranged from 18 to 28 years old. He was the only one representing France and western Europe.


== Activism ==
Méténier has focused notably on strengthening the voice of youth movements in Brussels.  He founded Generation Climate Europe in 2019 with the ambition to gather the main European youth movements active on environmental issues.


== References ==


== External links ==
ProActionTalk Episode 1 with Nathan Méténier 2021