The Net-Zero Asset Owner Alliance (NZAOA) is a global alliance of institutional investors convened by the United Nations (UN). Its members, which include large pension funds and insurance companies, manage substantial assets (approximately US$9.5 billion AUM) and have voluntarily committed to transitioning their entire investment portfolios to net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, in line with the Paris Climate Agreement. Operating under the umbrella of the UN financial initiatives UNEP FI and Principles for Responsible Investment (PRI), the initiative was the first in the financial sector to define specific interim targets and publish annual progress reports to ensure transparency and accountability. In addition to reducing emissions, targeted investment in climate solutions is also among its key objectives.


== History ==
Since its founding in 2019, the NZAOA has experienced continuous annual growth. Originally a group of 12 investors, it now comprises over 80 members in 19 countries across four continents. Between 2019 and 2025, Allianz's assets under management (AuM) have nearly quadrupled, from US$2.4 trillion to an impressive US$9.5 trillion.
In 2025, the NZAOA announced plans to admit new members as observers to allow more companies from emerging economies to participate in the program.


== Signatories ==
As of November 2025, the following companies and institutions are part of the 87 members of the alliance.:

AEGON Ltd.
Aéma Groupe
African Risk Capacity
Ageas
AkademikerPension
Alecta
Allianz SE
AMF Pension
Aviva plc
AXA
Bayerische Versorgungskammer
BNP Paribas
BT Pension Scheme
Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec
Caisse des Dépôts
Coface
Co-operators
Crédit Agricole Assurances
Dai-ichi Life Insurance Company
Danica Pension
EPPF
Folksam Group
Fonds de réserve pour les retraites
FPE Caixabank
Generali Group
Groupama
Industriens Pension
Intesa Sanpaolo Assicurazioni
Just Group plc.
KENFO
Konzern Versicherungskammer
Legal & General Group
M&G plc
MAIF
MAPFRE
Meiji Yasuda Life Insurance Company
Munich Re
National Treasury Management Agency
Nordea Life and Pension
Nykredit Pension
P+, Pension Insurance Corporation
PensionDanmark
Pensionskasse der Novartis AG
PFA Pension
Phoenix Group
Provinzial Holding
Prudential plc
QBE Insurance Group
Rothesay
R+V Versicherung
Sampension
Schäferkassen
Sompo Holdings
SPIN
St. James’s Place
Storebrand
Sumitomo Life
SV SparkassenVersicherung
Swiss Re
The Church Commissioners for England
UNIQA Group
University Pension Plan Ontario
University of Toronto Asset Management Corporation
USS
VidaCaixa
Vita Sammelstiftung
Wespath Benefits and Investments
Zurich Insurance Group


== See also ==
United Nations Environment Programme
Global Compact


== External links ==
Website
Net-Zero Asset Owner Alliance Influence Watch


== References ==