Rewriting Earth (formerly Rewriting Extinction) is a charity that raises awareness for both the climate and the biodiversity crisis through comics, videos and other media. It originally ran as a 12-month charitable campaign, where the money was donated to seven specific projects that tackled biodiversity issues with the goal of solving them within the twelve months of the campaign. After the success of the campaign, Rewriting Earth formed a charity that continues to make media focused on climate change and the biodiversity crisis.


== Project ==
Rewriting Extinction was founded by Emmy nominated writer and producer Paul Goodenough in 2019 and the campaign was officially launched in June 2021. It is targeting the wider population with comics, videos and the help of over 300 storytellers and celebrities such as Cara Delevingne, Richard Curtis, Ricky Gervais and Taika Waititi. The campaign is accompanied by the book The Most Important Comic Book on Earth: Stories to Save the World which was released on October 28, 2021, by DK. It includes 120 stories and comics about the climate and the biodiversity crisis from over 300 contributors including leading environmentalists, artists, authors, actors, filmmakers, musicians, drag performers and more. Although the book is not targeted at children, it was listed amongst the best books of 2021 for children by the Sunday Times. 
Some comics from the book are being published on social media on an ongoing basis and translated into multiple languages. Since the release, additional comic strips are being created and released on a regular basis. Authors include The Perry Bible Fellowship, Joel Pett, Drew Sheneman and War and Peas.
A variety of organizations support the campaign's work, including Global Rewilding Alliance, Make My Money Matter, Born Free Foundation and Sea Shepherd.  
In addition to social media, the comics are also featured on Webtoon and in a virtual gallery by Google Arts & Culture.
With the money raised, the campaign helped the World Land Trust to purchase the Laguna Grande Reserve in Guatemala.


== Creators behind The Most Important Comic Book on Earth ==
The stories in the book were created by comic artists in a collaboration with celebrities and environmental activists, including:

Steve Backshall
Cliff Chiang
Richard Curtis
Cara Delevigne
Judi Dench
Peter Gabriel
Ricky Gervais
Jane Goodall
Lenny Henry
Robert Kirkman
Alan Moore
Moses Brings Plenty
Luisa Neubauer
Chris Packham
Yoko Ono
Scott Snyder
Roger Stern
Taika Waititi
War and Peas


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website