Turoa (or Tūroa) is a skifield on the south western side of Mount Ruapehu, the highest mountain in the North Island of New Zealand, in Tongariro National Park.
The area has been used for skiing since before the completion of the Mountain Road; however, the first commercial field was ready in 1965, but with a poor snow season did not operate.
It was not until 1966 that there was adequate snow to enable operations. The rope tow and supporting buildings were owned and operated by June and John Broadbent from 1966 to 1973. Broadbent was a contractor from Auckland and also helped with the construction of the mountain road. Keen skiers took the 30 minute walk from the road end up to the ski field (Broadbent Flat) where they enjoyed the 1500 foot long rope tow and occasional night skiing.
DOC offered expressions of interest for the operation of a large commercial field and lifts and facilities were opened in 1978. The facilities were owned and operated by Ruapehu Alpine Lifts from 2000, a company that also owned the nearby Whakapapa skifield, also on Mt. Ruapehu. After liquidation of Ruapehu Alpine Lifts in 2023, the field was purchased by Pure Turoa. The field has been operated by Pure Turoa since April 2024.


== Features ==
There are two beginner areas, and many intermediate and advanced trails. The upper field is a mix of natural pipes, steep drops, fast plains, and easier slopes, along with several terrain parks. The lower field contains the field's single narrow beginner trail, Clarry's Track, and a few other intermediate trails. They also serve as access to the base area from the upper mountain, and are often crowded. The field is 496 hectares (1,230 acres) and has about a 690 metres (2,260 feet) vertical drop from the top chair to the skifield base.
On a good day, it is possible to hike to the top of the mountain with skis or snowboard in hand, view the Crater Lake, and then ski back down to the field, or to Whakapapa. Also on a clear day Mount Taranaki can be seen.


== Access ==
The skifield is reached via the Mountain Road from the town of Ohakune. The Mountain Road was built by locals from Ohakune, mostly during weekends after they formed the Mountain Road Association in 1952. Their aim was to open Ruapehu's southern slopes for skiing, partly as a replacement industry for the decline in logging which had sustained the town for the previous decades. The now renamed Ministry of Works helped with the road on one occasion by 'misplacing' a culvert destined for another roading project. The 17 kilometre road was opened in 1963, reached Turoa by 1967 and became a legal road in 1973. It winds up through spectacular native forest before breaking out above the tree line and finishes at a complex of carparks below the bottom chairlift.


== History ==
Night skiing for paying customers was trialled in 1986.
In 1995, skiers were evacuated from the skifield when a small volcanic eruption occurred at the crater lake, ejecting rocks, ash and steam.
In 2007, a high speed six-seater chairlift, the High Noon Express was installed, replacing an existing T-bar to the top of the skifield. The lift had several faults after being installed, such as cable derailments. In winter of 2010, two pylons on the lift collapsed, and the lift was redesigned with 15 new shorter pylons instead of 10 higher pylons in the original design and was open 2011 season. The redesign required relocating an older fixed grip quad chair, the High Flyer, which previously passed under the lift.
There was an accidental diesel spill in 2013 and after this the number of tanks and total storage was reduced.


=== Ruapehu Alpine Lifts ===
In 2022 following a poor snow season attributed largely to climate change, Ruapehu Alpine Lifts, the parent company of both Whakapapa  and Turoa skifields, entered voluntary administration in an attempt to avoid bankruptcy.  The company is a not-for-profit business that was established by members of ski clubs in 1953. In August 2022, Ruapehu Alpine Lifts laid off 130 workers  and its total debt climbed to over NZ$30 million. The financial situation of Ruapehu Alpine Lifts deteriorated rapidly following disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic. Efforts to secure additional funds from investors or the New Zealand government initially failed.
However, in December 2022, the government provided a $6 million loan to Ruapehu Alpine Lifts, to help ensure that both Ruapehu skifields could operate in winter 2023. This was in addition to $15 million provided in 2018 from the Provincial Growth Fund.


=== Pure Turoa ===
After the liquidation of Ruapehu Alpine Lifts in 2023, the ski area was purchased by Pure Turoa in March 2024. A ten year Department of Conservation concession was obtained by May 2024, and the ski area reopened for the 2024 season in June.
The concession required that the Nga Wai Heke quad chairlift was removed. The concession granting process was later identified as having flawed engagement with the Iwi. An outstanding issue is if managed retreat in relation to skifield activities is appropriate.
As of 2023 the Tūroa and Whakapapa Ski Areas on Mount Ruapehu were the only commercial ski areas within the North Island of New Zealand.


== Lifts ==
There are three proposed ski lifts at Turoa, which are due to be complete before 2030. A new Quad express set to be positioned west of the high noon express, to give better access to where the old Jumbo T-Bar used to operate near. The existing Giant fixed grip chairlift is set to be replaced by a new detachable quad express. A gondola is planned to be constructed on Turoa, replacing both the Parklane and Movenpick chairs, starting at the base area and terminating at the location of the top station of the Movenpick chair with a mid station allowing for access to the Wintergarden beginners area.

The comfortable capacity of the skifield as of 2023 was 4,800 skiers per day, having been higher in the past and after proposed upgrades will reduce to 4,500 skiers per day.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website