The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is a de jure agency of the executive branch of the United States federal government. USAID was the world's largest foreign aid agency, but it received major cutbacks in 2025, with its remaining functions being transferred to the United States Department of State.
USAID was established in 1961 to compete with the Soviet Union during the Cold War through the use of soft power. In 2025, the Trump administration ended 83% of overall projects. However, USAID had been reorganized by the United States Congress as an independent agency in 1998 and can only be closed down by an act of Congress. As such, it legally still exists.
From 2001 to 2024, USAID had an average budget of $23 billion a year and missions in over 100 countries in areas as diverse as education, global health, environmental protection, and democratic governance. In the twenty years from 2001 to 2021, USAID saved a yearly estimated range of between 4.1 and 4.7 million lives, with an estimated subset of between 1.2 and 1.7 million children under five saved.


== History ==


=== Creation (1961) and reorganization (1998) ===
In August 1953, President Eisenhower reorganized country offices as "United States Operations Missions" (USOMs). Congress passed the Foreign Assistance Act on September 4, 1961, which reorganized U.S. foreign assistance programs and mandated the creation of an agency to administer economic aid. The goal of this agency was to counter Soviet influence during the Cold War and to advance U.S. soft power through socioeconomic development. USAID was subsequently established by the executive order of President John F. Kennedy, who sought to unite several existing foreign assistance organizations and programs under one agency. After this transition, USOMs continued to exist for a time as an element of USAID. USAID by law is placed under "the direct authority and policy guidance of the Secretary of State".
In 1998, Congress established USAID as a functionally independent executive agency with the Foreign Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act, which gave the President 60 days to abolish or reorganize USAID. President Bill Clinton chose the second option and reorganized USAID, which retained its independence from the U.S. Department of State.


=== History (1961–2025) ===

USAID's predecessor agency was already substantial, with 6,400 U.S. staff in developing-country field missions in 1961. Except for the peak years of the Vietnam War, 1965–70, that was more U.S. field staff than USAID would have in the future, and triple the number USAID has had in field missions in the years since 2000.
After his inauguration as president on January 20, 1961, John F. Kennedy created the Peace Corps by Executive Order on March 1, 1961. On March 22, he sent a special message to Congress on foreign aid, asserting that the 1960s should be a "Decade of Development" and proposing to unify U.S. development assistance administration into a single agency. He sent a proposed "Act for International Development" to Congress in May and the resulting "Foreign Assistance Act" was approved in September, repealing the Mutual Security Act. In November, Kennedy signed the act and issued an Executive Order tasking the Secretary of State to create, within the State Department, the "Agency for International Development" (or A.I.D.: subsequently re-branded as USAID), as the successor to both ICA and the Development Loan Fund. With these actions, the U.S. created a permanent agency working with administrative autonomy under the policy guidance of the State Department to implement, through resident field missions, a global program of both technical and financial development assistance for low-income countries.
In the 21 years from 2001 to 2021 inclusive, USAID funding saved an estimated 92 million persons, with a range between 86 and 98 million. This is an estimated range of between 4.1 and 4.7 million lives saved per year. Among these lives saved were an estimated 30 million children younger than five, with a range between 26 and 35 million. This is an estimated range of between 1.2 and 1.7 million per year in the subset of children under five saved.


== Budget cuts and absorption into the State Department (2025) ==


=== Initial 90-day freeze ===
On January 24, 2025, during the second Trump administration, President Donald Trump ordered a near-total freeze on all foreign aid. In February, the administration placed most employees on administrative leave. Multiple lawsuits were filed against the Trump administration alleging that these actions were not within its powers without congressional authorization. Also in February, the administration made several allegations of wasteful spending and fraud. An analysis by Al Jazeera reported the claims regarding fraud to be unsubstantiated. An analysis by The Washington Post found some of the claims made by the administration regarding USAID spending to be misleading.
Several days later, Secretary of State Marco Rubio issued a waiver for humanitarian aid. However, a key issue developed over whether the waivers for lifesaving aid were actually translating into aid flowing. Despite the waiver, there was still much confusion about what agencies should do. More than 1,000 USAID employees and contractors were fired or furloughed following the near-total freeze on U.S. global assistance that the second Trump administration implemented.
On January 27, 2025, the agency's official government website was shut down.


=== Role of Elon Musk ===
On January 30, 2025, Elon Musk demanded that Jason Gray, acting administrator of USAID at that time, shut off email and cellphone access for USAID workers around the world, including in conflict zones. Gray refused, saying that doing so would put their lives at risk. By the next day, Gray was removed from his post.
On February 3, 2025, Elon Musk, who has been carrying out parts of Trump's cost-cutting agenda, announced that he and Trump were in the process of shutting down USAID, claiming it to be a "criminal organization" and that it was "beyond repair". Because USAID's Inspector General had previously launched a probe into Starlink, Musk was criticized as having a conflict of interest.
Andrew Natsios, the administrator for USAID during the George W. Bush administration, told PBS that,
"With all due respect, none of these people know anything about AID. What does Musk know about international development? Absolutely nothing. He has a bunch of young kids in their 20s. They don't know. They're techies. They don't know anything about international development. They don't know anything about the Global South."


=== Role of U.S. secretary of state Marco Rubio ===
On February 3, 2025, Secretary of State Marco Rubio announced his appointment as Acting Administrator of USAID by President Trump and that USAID was being merged into the State Department. The legality of these actions is disputed given the mandate for the agency's creation in the Foreign Assistance Act. It was announced that on February 6, 2025, at 11:59 pm (EST) all USAID direct hire personnel would be placed on administrative leave globally, with the exception of designated personnel responsible for mission-critical functions, core leadership and specially designated programs.


=== Initial effects on health assistance ===
On February 6, 2025, reports indicated that the total number of employees to be retained was 294, out of a total of more than 10,000. Trump declared that agency leaders were "radical left lunatics", while the State Department ordered them to halt virtually all their projects, even if that meant ceasing programs that helped to eradicate smallpox and prevented millions of HIV cases. The freeze in HIV relief programs, including PEPFAR, is estimated to jeopardize treatment access for 20 million people, including 500,000 children. This drastic action led to sudden pauses in over 30 clinical trials for ailments such as HIV, malaria, cholera, cervical cancer, and tuberculosis, leaving participants with medical devices in their bodies and cut off from researchers, likely going against the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.


=== Initial effects on wartime assistance ===
It also led to a pause in other efforts such as wartime help in Ukraine, hospital assistance in Syria, education programs in Mali, and conservation efforts in the Amazon rainforest.
On February 6, CBS News reported that due to the civil war in Sudan, often called the "Forgotten War" because it receives comparatively little attention compared to the Ukraine and Gaza, an estimated 3 million children under age 5 are suffering from acute malnutrition. In September 2024, the Biden administration planned for $424 million in new humanitarian assistance for Sudanese persons, including $276 million being sent through USAID. However, the Trump administration's 90-day freeze interrupted this.
The American Farm Bureau Federation stated, "AID plays a critical role in reducing hunger around the world while sourcing markets for the surplus foods America's farmers and ranchers grow".


=== Famine Early Warning ===
CNN reported on March 9 that the Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS NET) had stopped operating and had its data pulled offline. FEWS NET had been considered the "gold standard" of famine warning, providing 8-month projections of food security issues.
The Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) is another early-warning system supported by various governments, including the United States. IPC uses volunteers for specific country analysis, whereas FEW NETS had used paid staff.


=== Reduction to 17% of programs ===
On March 10, 2025, U.S. Secretary of State Marco Rubio announced that the Trump administration had concluded its review, and 83% of USAID's programs would be cancelled, involving approximately 5,200 contracts.


=== Gavi Foundation and vaccines ===
On March 24, 2025, the Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE) announced the termination of a $2.63 billion grant from USAID to the Gavi Foundation because the Gavi Foundation "prioritizes 'zero-dose' children." DOGE stated the United States federal government saved $1.75 billion by cancelling the grant, which was 6.575% of the total USAID budget.


=== Partial add-backs for UN World Food Programme ===
On April 8, 2025, USAID announced it was making some exceptions to the recent announcement of cancelled participation in the UN's World Food Programme. Specifically, USAID was restoring food aid to Lebanon, Syria, Somalia, Jordan, Iraq and Ecuador, and other countries for a total of 14 nations (plus the International Organization for Migration in the Pacific region). However, food aid was not restored to Yemen or Afghanistan with a State Department spokesperson saying this was "based on concern that the funding was benefiting terrorist groups, including the Houthis and the Taliban."


=== Competition with China ===
Senator Roger Wicker (R-Mississippi) said, "I have felt for a long time that USAID is our way to combat the [$1 trillion] Belt and Road Initiative, which is China's effort to really gain influence around the world, including Africa and South America in the Western Hemisphere." In addition, China often completes such projects on the basis of loans, not grants. Since 2000, African countries have been the recipient of over $182 billion in Chinese loans, with interest rates averaging about 3%.
In February 2025, China pledged an additional $4.4 million to de-mining efforts in Cambodia.
Regarding the March 28 Myanmar earthquake, a U.S. State Department spokesperson stated that the United States is working through local partners in Myanmar, and said, "The success in the work and our impact will still be there." However, a former USAID mission head in Myanmar said, "This is the new normal. This is what it looks like when the United States sits on the international sidelines, when the United States is a weaker international player, when it cedes the space to other global players like China." Other potential issues are secondary crisis(es) from diseases such as cholera which can appear in the days and weeks following a disaster.
Michael Sobolik, a China analyst at the conservative Hudson Institute think tank and a former aide to Senator Ted Cruz (R-Texas), has stated, "Sure, USAID was doing some highly questionable stuff that's worthy of review. But don't throw the baby out with the bathwater. Beijing is hoping we do exactly that."


=== Lawsuits ===


==== American Federation of Government Employees v. Trump ====
This lawsuit claimed the Trump administration had violated separation of powers, the Take Care Clause of the Constitution, and the Administrative Procedure Act. And initially, U.S. district judge Carl Nichols, whom Trump had nominated in 2019, stated he would enter in a temporary restraining order pausing the plan to put thousands of employees on leave and removing workers from abroad.
However, on February 21, 2025, Judge Nichols reversed himself and cleared the way for the Trump administration to move forward with thousands of layoffs of USAID staffers, as well as providing those abroad with a 30-day deadline to move back to the United States at government expense. Nichols had previously stated that these Trump administration policies threatened the safety of USAID workers abroad because many were deployed in unstable regions.


==== 5-4 Supreme Court decision that completed projects must be paid for ====
On February 10, 2025, the AIDS Vaccine Advocacy Coalition and the Journalism Development Network filed suit in District Court seeking a preliminary injunction that would prevent the enforcement of the 90-day freeze.
On February 13, 2025, a district court ruled that the government must pay $2 billion for projects already completed. On March 5, 2025, the United States Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that the federal government must pay for completed projects. Voting in the majority were the three Democratic appointees justices Sotomayor, Kagan, and Jackson, and Republican appointees Chief Justice Roberts and Justice Barrett. Voting in the minority were the four other Republican appointees justices Thomas, Alito, Gorsuch, and Kavanaugh. However, the district judge was ordered to proceed with "due regard for the feasibility of any compliance timelines."
On March 11, Associated Press reported that "until recently" no payments had been made because DOGE had disabled the payment system. On March 20, Reuters reported that the Trump administration was close to paying the $671 million owed for projects completed by the organizations which had sued.


==== Lawsuit which claimed Musk needed Senate confirmation ====
On March 18, 2025, U.S. district judge Theodore Chuang ruled that Musk's and DOGE's actions in placing USAID employees on leave were likely unconstitutional. Judge Chuang issued a preliminary injunction against further employees being placed on leave, buildings being closed, or websites having their contents deleted.
On March 28, 2025, the U.S. Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals overruled Judge Chuang on the preliminary injunction, without deciding the merits. Judge Marvin Quattlebaum wrote, "And none of this is to say that plaintiffs will not be able to develop evidence of unconstitutional conduct as the case progresses. Time will tell."


=== Absorption by State Department ===
On March 28, 2025, U.S. secretary of state Marco Rubio notified Congress that USAID would be dissolved and absorbed into the U.S. State Department, stating that USAID had been fiscally irresponsible and strayed from original mission. He argued, "Unfortunately, USAID strayed from its original mission long ago. As a result, the gains were too few and the costs were too high."
Since July 1, 2025, USAID's operations have ceased and U.S. foreign assistance has now been administered by the U.S. State Department. In connection with this effort, 83% of USAID programs were canceled, and 94% of staff were laid off.
Representative Jim Himes (D-Conn.), the top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, stated as an example of what he viewed as abrupt and irresponsible cost-cutting: "Thanks to DOGE, the men we paid to guard the most vicious ISIS terrorists in the world in Syria walked off the job."
USAID employees were not automatically transferred. Instead, the State Department is engaging in a "separate and independent hiring process."


=== Impact of the demise of USAID on global health ===
The impact of the demise of USAID on global health is wide-reaching. A study published in The Lancet on June 30, 2025, estimated that funding cuts and the abolition of the agency could result in at least 14 million preventable deaths by 2030, 4.5 million of which could be among children under 5 years old.


==== PEPFAR and HIV medication ====
The Lancet study concluded that the discontinuation of PEPFAR alone could cause as many as 10.75 million new HIV infections and as many as 2.93 million deaths related to HIV. The study warned that for low and middle income countries, "the resulting shock would be similar in scale to a global pandemic or a major armed conflict."
Another study published in March 2025 concluded that the suspension of PEPFAR could result in HIV-related deaths surging to as high as 630,000 per year. Christine Stegling, deputy executive director at UNAIDS, estimated that there could be a 400% increase in AIDS-related deaths around the world if PEPFAR was not formally reauthorized for USAID funding, which represents around 6.3 million AIDS-related deaths within four years. In 2024, PEPFAR funds accounted for 14% of the entire health budget of Zimbabwe.
In March 2025, experts from the Center for Global Development estimated that before the freeze, USAID programs annually prevented approximately 1,650,000 deaths from HIV/AIDS, 500,000 deaths from lack of vaccines, 310,000 deaths from tuberculosis and 290,000 deaths from malaria.


==== Breastfeeding and maternal health ====
USAID-funded breast feeding programs to reduce malnutrition in Nepal were brought to a halt following the aid freeze on January 20, 2025.
According to Pio Smith, UNFPA's Asia-Pacific regional director, the USAID freeze could lead to 1,200 maternal deaths and 109,000 additional unwanted pregnancies in the next three years in Afghanistan.


==== March USAID memo ====
A USAID info memo written by Nicholas Enrich, Acting Assistant Administrator for Global Health, dated March 4, 2025, outlined the risks of the aid freeze. He stated that a permanent suspension of lifesaving humanitarian aid posed a direct threat to public health, economic stability, national security and biothreat vulnerability. He concluded: "Any decision to halt or significantly reduce global health funding for lifesaving humanitarian assistance (LHA)—despite approved waivers—and USAID global health programming, despite congressional mandates, would have severe domestic and global consequences." Enrich was notified that he was put on administrative leave less than 30 minutes after the memo's publication, a decision that had reportedly been made a week prior.


==== Cases refuting claim that no one has died ====
Pe Kha Lau, 71, died after she was discharged from a USAID-funded healthcare facility operated by the International Rescue Committee (IRC) while still relying on oxygen to survive. In the Umpiem Mai camp in Thailand, witnesses reported the deaths of multiple patients who too relied on oxygen. The IRC offered their condolences to the family and friends of Pe Kha Lau. Nicholas Kristof also documented evidence contradicting Elon Musk's claim that "No one has died as a result of a brief pause to do a sanity check on foreign aid funding. No one." Secretary of State Marco Rubio similarly claimed while testifying before Congress that no death resulted from the shutdown.


==== Incineration of emergency food ====
In July 2025 The Atlantic reported that the order had been given to incinerate nearly 500 metric tons of emergency food. Citing former and current government employees, The Atlantic wrote that USAID had already bought the food, some $800,000 of high-energy biscuits (a stopgap measure for feeding children under 5) for the World Food Programme to distribute in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Instead, it remained in a warehouse in Dubai for months, was set to expire the day after the report, and would deteriorate quickly and be incinerated at a cost of $130,000. Employees could no longer ship the food without the permission of the new heads of American foreign assistance, which had been requested repeatedly. The Atlantic cited the sources as saying that improper storage or delivery complications such as floods or terrorism might previously have cost the agency a few dozen tons of fortified foods a year at most, and that they'd never before seen the U.S. government give up on food that could have been put to good use.
Secretary of State Marco Rubio testified before the House Appropriations Committee in May that the food would be distributed before spoiling. The Atlantic's reporter stated she'd reviewed the incineration order, which had been given by the time of Rubio's testimony. These high-energy biscuits are estimated to be able to feed 1.5 million children for a week. This food was previously under the authority of Pete Marocco, and then under the authority of Jeremy Lewin.


==== Waste of mpox vaccines ====
According to Africa CDC nearly 800,000 doses of mpox vaccine the Biden administration had pledged to donate to African countries could not be shipped as they had not been sent by the time they had a remaining shelf life of under six months, which Africa CDC described as the minimum time required to ship vaccines in order to ensure arrival in good condition and allow implementation. Politico noted that the loss of the shots came after the Trump administration cut back on foreign aid programs and closed USAID, and that although the U.S. had not disclosed their price, UNICEF described a price of "up to $65" per dose as "the lowest price in the market."


==== Incineration of contraceptives ====
In July 2025 Reuters, citing unnamed sources and a screenshot, reported that contraceptive implants, pills, and intrauterine devices worth $9.7 million would be incinerated.
Reuters had reported in June that contraceptives meant largely for vulnerable women in Sub-Saharan Africa, including young girls who face higher risks from pregnancy as well as those fleeing conflict or who could not otherwise afford or access contraceptives, had been warehoused in Belgium and Dubai for months following Trump's cuts to foreign aid and USAID. In its July article Reuters reported that the Belgian stockpile would be incinerated in France as medical waste, costing $160,000 and likely comprising "dozens of truckloads". The Belgium foreign ministry told Reuters it had "explored all possible options to prevent the destruction" and would keep trying. Reuters reported that the United Nations Population Fund (UNPFA) tried to buy the contraceptives. However, the fact that contraceptives were embossed with the USAID trademark was a problem, as was the way the U.S. could not ensure UNFPA would not share them with groups offering abortions, violating the Mexico City policy Trump had reinstated in January. Sarah Shaw, nonprofit MSI Reproductive Choices' Associate Director of Advocacy, told Reuters the organization had volunteered for pay for repackaging the supplies to remove USAID branding, shipping them, and for import duties, but the U.S. government declined, saying it would only sell the supplies at full market value. Shaw added that this was "clearly not about saving money." A source in this Reuters article concluded that "Washington did not want any USAID-branded supplies to be rerouted elsewhere."
Citing unnamed sources and an internal document listing warehouse stocks, Reuters reported the contraceptives were due to expire between April 2027 and September 2031.


==== Counter which estimates preventable deaths ====
Brooke Nichols, an infectious disease modeler working at Boston University, created an impact counter to estimate the life toll of funding cuts on various USAID health programs. As of December 4, 2025, the counter estimates that over 661,000 deaths have been caused by the funding discontinuation, over 446,500 of which are children.


==== Malaria ====
The President's Malaria Initiative, started with help from George W. Bush, has contributed to a more than 60% reduction in malaria deaths, saved 7.6 million lives, and prevented 1.5 billion malaria cases globally between 2000 and 2019. PMI has supported malaria prevention and control for over 500 million at-risk people in Africa.
However, the USAID funding of PMI has been cut an estimated 47% as of June 2025. In countries such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), these funds had supported the supply of antimalarial drugs to numerous health zones, including preventive treatments for pregnant women. Health officials in the DRC reported that the effects of these cuts were already being felt, with increased risk of severe illness and death from malaria among vulnerable populations. Former aid workers and experts also expressed concern that reduced funding undermined disease surveillance systems that help detect malaria and other outbreaks early. Such surveillance not only protects affected countries but also contributes to U.S. health security by limiting the global spread of disease. Aid organizations also highlighted how these cuts create a "vicious cycle", with malnutrition and malaria reinforcing one another. Reductions in U.S. support for nutrition programs increase children's vulnerability to malaria and other diseases, while higher malaria infections can worsen malnutrition.


==== Humanitarian crisis in Haiti ====
In July 2025, the United Nations reported that the cut of USAID funding to Haiti represents a halt of approximately 80% of US-funded programmes. Food security, access to drinking water, primary healthcare, education and protection are all affected. Children are among the hardest hit. Modibo Traore, United Nations OCHA's country director in Haiti, said, "The withdrawal of US funding has led to a multidimensional regression in the rights of women and girls in Haiti."


=== $8 billion "claw back" for USAID but not PEPFAR ===
In June 2025, the White House requested that Congress pass a package of rescissions, or "claw backs", of approximately $8 billion in foreign aid and $1 billion for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
The House of Representatives passed the cuts as requested. The Senate excluded the PEPFAR cuts, which is the program started in 2003 during the presidency of George W Bush to help provide HIV medicines to lower-income countries. The Senate passed two preliminary votes in close 51-50 fashion with Vice-president JD Vance casting the tie-breaking votes. A rescission is one of the exceptions to the Senate's 60-vote filibuster rule.
On July 10, President Trump focused on the public broadcasting aspect, criticizing CNN, and also "MSDNC" which is a portmanteau ("smash up") of MSNBC and DNC (Democratic National Committee). In a social media post, he wrote, "Any Republican that votes to allow this monstrosity to continue broadcasting will not have my support or Endorsement."
On July 17, the Senate voted 51–48 in favor of the cuts. Later that same day, the House of Representatives voted 216–213 for the Senate version, meaning PEPFAR was protected in the amount of $400 million. Regarding the cuts to public broadcasting, service to rural areas became one of the political issues.


=== July 2025 reports that PEPFAR had been cut 50% back in February ===
In July 2025, four congressional aides reported that cuts by the Trump administration in February effectively put many contracts on hold.  The aides stated that many of the promised waivers did not translate to action and an estimated 50% of budgeted money did not flow to providers.


=== Range of avoidable deaths if all Trump-era cuts continue ===
An article updated July 2025 in The Lancet estimates 4.5 million avoidable deaths in children under five years by 2030 if all spending cuts continue (cuts in both PEPFAR and broader aid). These estimates ranged between 3.1 and 5.9 million.
In an article published the same month, Kelsey Piper writing for Vox argues that it is difficult to predict the extent to which other nonprofits and governments will take the place of USAID cuts. She notes that even the most rigorous research must make large assumptions, and contends that if the numbers are over-estimated, opponents may be able to "dismiss the entire foreign aid project as one run by politically motivated liars." Additionally, Piper said, "The White House has repeatedly lost when seeking congressional approval to dismantle our best-performing life-saving programs. So the administration has resorted to doing it piecewise and, as much as possible, avoiding a public debate."


=== Another attempted $5 billion in cuts, in form of "pocket rescission" in September ===
In late August, President Trump informed House speaker Mike Johnson, that he would not spend $4.9 billion in foreign aid which Congress already approved. This is a "pocket rescission", in which a president announces money will not be spent shortly before the 30 September end of the fiscal year, preventing Congress from acting on his request within 45 days. The Guardian states this is the first time in 50 years such a rescission has been made.
In early September, a district judge ordered the Trump administration to spend those funds.  On appeal, Chief Justice John Roberts, who handles emergency petitions for Washington DC, gave aid groups who had sued until September 12 to file a response.
Some of the money was scheduled to go to United Nations organizations and peacekeeping purposes, as well as projects of economic development assistance and democracy promotion.


== Purposes ==
USAID's decentralized network of resident field missions was drawn on to manage U.S. government programs in low-income countries for various purposes.

Disaster relief
Poverty relief
Technical cooperation on global issues, including the environment
U.S. bilateral interests
Socioeconomic development


=== Disaster relief ===

Some of the U.S. government's earliest foreign aid programs provided relief in war-created crises. In 1915, U.S. government assistance through the Commission for Relief in Belgium headed by Herbert Hoover prevented starvation in Belgium after the German invasion. After 1945, the European Recovery Program championed by Secretary of State George Marshall (the "Marshall Plan") helped rebuild war-torn Western Europe.


=== Poverty relief ===

After 1945, many newly independent countries needed assistance to relieve the chronic deprivation afflicting their low-income populations. USAID and its predecessor agencies have continuously provided poverty relief in many forms, including assistance to public health and education services targeted at the poorest. USAID has also helped manage food aid provided by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. Also, USAID provides funding to NGOs to supplement private donations in relieving chronic poverty.


=== Global issues ===
Technical cooperation between nations is essential for addressing a range of cross-border concerns like communicable diseases, environmental issues, trade and investment cooperation, safety standards for traded products, money laundering, and so forth. The United States has specialized federal agencies dealing with such areas, such as the Centers for Disease Control and the Environmental Protection Agency. USAID's special ability to administer programs in low-income countries supported these and other U.S. government agencies' international work on global concerns.


==== Environment ====
Among these global interests, environmental issues attracted high attention. USAID assisted projects that conserve and protect threatened land, water, forests, and wildlife. USAID also assists projects in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and building resilience to the risks associated with global climate change. U.S. environmental regulation laws require that programs sponsored by USAID should be both economically and environmentally sustainable.


=== U.S. national interests ===
Congress appropriates exceptional financial assistance to allies to support U.S. geopolitical interests, mainly in the form of "Economic Support Funds" (ESF). USAID is called on to administer the bulk (90%) of ESF and is instructed: "To the maximum extent feasible, [to] provide [ESF] assistance ... consistent with the policy directions, purposes, and programs of [development assistance]."
Also, when U.S. troops were in the field, USAID could supplement the "Civil Affairs" programs that the U.S. military conducts to win the friendship of local populations. In these circumstances, USAID may be directed by specially appointed diplomatic officials of the State Department, as has been done in Afghanistan and Pakistan during operations against al-Qaeda.
U.S. commercial interests were served by U.S. law's requirement that most goods and services financed by USAID must be sourced from U.S. vendors. American farms supplied about 41 percent of the food aid according to a 2021 report by the Congressional Research Service.


=== Socioeconomic development ===
To help low-income nations achieve self-sustaining socioeconomic development, USAID assisted them in improving the management of their own resources. USAID's assistance for socioeconomic development mainly provides technical advice, training, scholarships, commodities, and financial assistance. Through grants and contracts, USAID mobilized the technical resources of the private sector and other U.S. government agencies, universities, and NGOs to participate in this assistance.
Programs of the various types above frequently reinforced one another. For example, the Foreign Assistance Act required USAID to use funds appropriated for geopolitical purposes ("Economic Support Funds") to support socioeconomic development to the maximum extent possible.


== Modes of assistance ==
USAID delivered both technical and financial assistance:


=== Technical assistance ===
Technical assistance included technical advice, training, scholarships, construction, and commodities. USAID contracts or procures technical assistance and provides it in-kind to recipients. For technical advisory services, USAID draws on experts from the private sector, mainly from the assisted country's pool of expertise and from specialized U.S. government agencies. Many host-government leaders have drawn on USAID's technical assistance to develop IT systems and procure computer hardware to strengthen their institutions.
To build indigenous expertise and leadership, USAID financed scholarships to U.S. universities and assists in the strengthening of developing countries' universities. Local universities' programs in developmentally important sectors were assisted directly and through USAID support for forming partnerships with U.S. universities.
The various forms of technical assistance were frequently coordinated as capacity-building packages for the development of local institutions.


=== Financial assistance ===

Financial assistance supplied cash to developing country organizations to supplement their budgets. USAID also provided financial assistance to local and international NGOs who in turn give technical assistance in developing countries. Although USAID formerly provided loans, all financial assistance is now provided in the form of non-reimbursable grants.
In recent years, the United States had increased its emphasis on financial rather than technical assistance. In 2004, the Bush administration created the Millennium Challenge Corporation as a new foreign aid agency that is mainly restricted to providing financial assistance. In 2009, the Obama administration initiated a major realignment of USAID's own programs to emphasize financial assistance, referring to it as "government-to-government" or "G2G" assistance.


=== Public–private partnerships ===
In April 2023, USAID and the Global Food Safety Initiative (GFSI) announced a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to improve food safety and sustainable food systems in Africa. GFSI's work in benchmarking and standard harmonisation aims to foster mutual acceptance of GFSI-recognized certification programmes for the food industry.


== Organization ==

USAID is organized around country development programs managed by resident USAID offices in developing countries ("USAID missions"), supported by USAID's global headquarters in Washington, D.C.


=== Country development programs ===
USAID planned its work in each country around an individual country development program managed by a resident office called a "mission". The USAID mission and its U.S. staff were guests in the country, with a status that is usually defined by a "framework bilateral agreement" between the government of the United States and the host government. Framework bilaterals give the mission and its U.S. staff privileges similar to (but not necessarily the same as) those accorded to the U.S. embassy and diplomats by the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961.
USAID missions work in over fifty countries, consulting with their governments and non-governmental organizations to identify programs that will receive USAID's assistance. As part of this process, USAID missions conduct socio-economic analysis, discuss projects with host-country leaders, design assistance to those projects, award contracts and grants, administer assistance (including evaluation and reporting), and manage flows of funds.
As countries develop and need less assistance, USAID shrunk and ultimately closed its resident missions. USAID had closed missions in a number of countries that had achieved a substantial level of prosperity, including South Korea, Turkey, and Costa Rica.
USAID also closed missions when requested by host countries for political reasons. In September 2012, the U.S. closed USAID/Russia at that country's request. Its mission in Moscow had been in operation for two decades. On May 1, 2013, the president of Bolivia, Evo Morales, asked USAID to close its mission, which had worked in the country for 49 years. The closure was completed on September 20, 2013.
USAID missions were led by mission directors and were staffed both by USAID Foreign Service officers and by development professionals from the country itself, with the host-country professionals forming the majority of the staff. The length of a Foreign service officer's "tour" in most countries is four years, to provide enough time to develop in-depth knowledge about the country. (Shorter tours of one or two years were usual in countries of exceptional hardship or danger.)
The mission director was a member of the U.S. Embassy's "Country Team" under the direction of the U.S. ambassador. As a USAID mission works in an unclassified environment with relative frequent public interaction, most missions were initially located in independent offices in the business districts of capital cities. Since the passage of the Foreign Affairs Agencies Consolidation Act in 1998 and the bombings of U.S. Embassy chanceries in East Africa in the same year, missions have gradually been moved into U.S. Embassy chancery compounds.


=== USAID/Washington ===

The country programs were supported by USAID's headquarters in Washington, D.C., "USAID/Washington", where about half of USAID's Foreign Service officers work on rotation from foreign assignments, alongside USAID's Civil Service staff and top leadership.
USAID is headed by an administrator. Under the Biden administration, the administrator became a regular attendee of the National Security Council.
USAID/Washington helped define overall federal civilian foreign assistance policy and budgets, working with the State Department, Congress, and other U.S. government agencies. It was organized into "Bureaus" covering geographical areas, development subject areas, and administrative functions. Each bureau is headed by an assistant administrator appointed by the president.
(Some tasks similar to those of USAID's Bureaus were performed by what were termed "Independent Offices".)

Geographic bureaus
AFR – Africa
ASIA – Asia
LAC – Latin America & the Caribbean
E&E – Europe and Eurasia
ME – the Middle East
Subject-area bureaus
GH – Global Health
Every year, the Global Health Bureau reported to the U.S. Congress through its Global Health Report to Congress. The Global Health Bureau also submits a yearly report on the Call to Action: ending preventable child and maternal deaths. This is part of USAID's follow-up to the 2012, where it committed to ending preventable child and maternal deaths in a generation with A Promise Renewed.
E3 – Economic Growth, Education, and the Environment
Economic Growth offices in E3 defined Agency policy and provide technical support to Mission assistance activities in the areas of economic policy formulation, international trade, sectoral regulation, capital markets, microfinance, energy, infrastructure, land tenure, urban planning and property rights, gender equality and women's empowerment. The Engineering Division, in particular, draws on licensed professional engineers to support USAID Missions in a multibillion-dollar portfolio of construction projects, including medical facilities, schools, universities, roads, power plants, and water and sanitation plants.
The Education Office in E3 defines Agency policy and provides technical support to Mission assistance activities for both basic and tertiary education.
Environment offices in E3 define Agency policy and provide technical support to Mission assistance activities in the areas of climate change and biodiversity.
Bureau for Humanitarian Assistance
Bureau for Democracy, Human Rights and Governance
The mission of the DRG Bureau was to lead USAID's efforts to invigorate democracy, enhance human rights and justice, and bolster governance that advances the public interest and delivers inclusive development.
LAB – U.S. Global Development Lab
The Lab serves as an innovation hub, taking smart risks to test new ideas and partner within the Agency and with other actors to harness the power of innovative tools and approaches that accelerate development impact.
RFS – Resilience and Food Security
Headquarters bureaus
M – Management
OHCTM – Office of Human Capital and Talent Management
LPA – Legislative and Public Affairs
PPL – Policy, Planning, and Learning
BRM – Office of Budget and Resource Management
Independent oversight of USAID activities was provided by its Office of Inspector General, U.S. Agency for International Development, which conducted criminal and civil investigations, financial and performance audits, reviews, and inspections of USAID activities around the world.


=== Staffing ===
USAID's staffing reported to Congress in June 2016 totaled 10,235, including both field missions "overseas" (7,176) and the Washington, D.C. headquarters (3,059). Of this total, 1,850 were USAID Foreign Service officers who spend their careers mostly residing overseas (1,586 overseas in June 2016) and partly on rotation in Washington, D.C. (264). The Foreign Service officers stationed overseas worked alongside the 4,935 local staff of USAID's field missions.
Host-country staff normally worked under one-year contracts that were renewed annually. Formerly, host-country staff could be recruited as "direct hires" in career positions and at present many host-country staff continue working with USAID missions for full careers on a series of one-year contracts. In USAID's management approach, local staff may fill highly responsible, professional roles in program design and management.
U.S. citizens can apply to become USAID Foreign Service officers by competing for specific job openings based on academic qualifications and experience in development programs. Within five years of recruitment, most Foreign Service officers receive tenure for an additional 20+ years of employment before mandatory retirement. Some were promoted to the Senior Foreign Service with extended tenure, subject to the Foreign Service's mandatory retirement age of 65. (This recruitment system differs from the State Department's use of the "Foreign Service Officer Test" to identify potential U.S. diplomats. Individuals who pass the test become candidates for the State Department's selection process, which emphasizes personal qualities in thirteen dimensions such as "Composure" and "Resourcefulness". No specific education level is required.)
In 2008, USAID launched the "Development Leadership Initiative" to reverse the decline in USAID's Foreign Service officer staffing, which had fallen to a total of about 1,200 worldwide. Although USAID's goal was to double the number of Foreign Service officers to about 2,400 in 2012, actual recruitment net of attrition reached only 820 by the end of 2012. USAID's 2016 total of 1,850 Foreign Service officers compared with 13,000 in the State Department.


== Field missions ==

While USAID can have as little presence in a country as a single person assigned to the U.S. embassy, a full USAID mission in a larger country may have twenty or more USAID Foreign Service officers and a hundred or more professional and administrative employees from the country itself.
The USAID mission's staff is divided into specialized offices in three groups: (1) assistance management offices; (2) the mission director's and the Program office; and (3) the contracting, financial management, and facilities offices.


=== Assistance management offices ===
Called "technical" offices by USAID staff, these offices designed and managed the technical and financial assistance that USAID provides to their local counterparts' projects. The technical offices that were frequently found in USAID missions include Health and Family Planning, Education, Environment, Democracy, and Economic Growth.


==== Health and Family Planning ====
Examples of projects assisted by missions' Health and Family Planning offices were projects for the eradication of communicable diseases, strengthening of public health systems focusing on maternal-child health including family planning services, HIV-AIDS monitoring, delivery of medical supplies including contraceptives, and coordination of Demographic and Health Surveys. This assistance is primarily targeted to the poor majority of the population and corresponds to USAID's poverty relief objective, as well as strengthening the basis for socio-economic development.


==== Education ====
USAID's Education offices mainly assisted the national school system, emphasizing broadening the coverage of quality basic education to reach the entire population. Examples of projects often assisted by Education offices were projects for curriculum development, teacher training, and provision of improved textbooks and materials. Larger programs have included school construction. Education offices often manage scholarship programs for training in the U.S., while assistance to the country's universities and professional education institutions may be provided by Economic Growth and Health offices. The Education office's emphasis on school access for the poor majority of the population corresponds to USAID's poverty relief objective, as well as to the socioeconomic development objective in the long term.


==== Environment ====
Examples of projects assisted by environmental offices were projects for tropical forest conservation, protection of indigenous people's lands, regulation of marine fishing industries, pollution control, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, and helping communities adapt to climate change. Environment assistance corresponds to USAID's objective of technical cooperation on global issues, as well as laying a sustainable basis for USAID's socioeconomic development objective in the long term.
USAID (United States Agency for International Development) has recently initiated the HEARTH (Health, Ecosystems and Agriculture for Resilient, Thriving Societies) program, which operated in 10 countries with 15 activities aimed at promoting conservation of threatened landscapes and enhancing community well-being by partnering with the private sector to align business goals with development objectives. Through HEARTH, USAID implements One Health principles to achieve sustainable benefits for both people and the environment through projects focused on livelihoods, well-being, conservation, biodiversity, and governance.


==== Democracy ====
Examples of projects assisted by Democracy offices were projects for the country's political institutions, including elections, political parties, legislatures, and human rights organizations. Counterparts include the judicial sector and civil society organizations that monitor government performance. Democracy assistance received its greatest impetus at the time of the creation of the successor states to the USSR starting in about 1990, corresponding both to USAID's objective of supporting U.S. bilateral interests and to USAID's socioeconomic development objective.


==== Economic Growth ====

Examples of projects often assisted by Economic Growth offices were projects for improvements in agricultural techniques and marketing (the mission may have had a specialized "Agriculture" office), development of microfinance industries, streamlining of Customs administrations (to accelerate the growth of exporting industries), and modernization of government regulatory frameworks for the industry in various sectors (telecommunications, agriculture, and so forth). In USAID's early years and some larger programs, Economic Growth offices have financed economic infrastructure like roads and electrical power plants. Economic Growth assistance was thus quite diverse in terms of the range of sectors where it may work. It corresponded to USAID's socioeconomic development objective and is the source of sustainable poverty reduction. Economic Growth offices also occasionally manage assistance to poverty relief projects, such as to government programs that provide "cash transfer" payments to low-income families.


==== Special assistance ====
Some USAID missions had specialized technical offices for areas like counter-narcotics assistance or assistance in conflict zones.
Disaster assistance on a large scale is provided through USAID's Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster Assistance. Rather than having a permanent presence in country missions, this office has supplies pre-positioned in strategic locations to respond quickly to disasters when and where they occur.


=== The Office of the Mission Director and the Program Office ===
The mission director's signature authorized technical offices to assist according to the designs and budgets they propose. With the help of the Program Office, the mission director ensures that designs were consistent with USAID policy for the country, including budgetary earmarks by which Washington directs that funds be used for certain general purposes such as public health or environmental conservation. The Program Office compiles combined reports to Washington to support budget requests to Congress and to verify that budgets were used as planned.


=== Contracting, financial management and management offices ===
While the mission director was the public face and key decision-maker for an impressive array of USAID technical capabilities, arguably the offices that made USAID preeminent among U.S. government agencies in the ability to follow through on assistance agreements in low-income countries were the "support" offices.


==== Contracting ====
Commitments of U.S. government funds to NGOs and firms that implemented USAID's assistance programs can only be made in compliance with carefully designed contracts and grant agreements executed by warranted Contracting and agreement officers. The mission director is authorized to commit financial assistance directly to the country's government agencies.


==== Financial management ====
Funds can be committed only when the Mission's Controller certifies their availability for the stated purpose. "FM" offices assisted technical offices in financial analysis and in developing detailed budgets for inputs needed by projects assisted. They evaluate potential recipients' management abilities before financial assistance can be authorized and then review implementers' expenditure reports with great care. This office often had the largest number of staff of any office in the mission.


==== Management ====
Called the "Executive Office" in USAID (sometimes leading to confusion with the Embassy's Executive Office, which is the office of the Ambassador), "EXO" provided operational support for mission offices, including human resources, information systems management, transportation, property, and procurement services. Increasing integration into Embassies' chancery complexes, and the State Department's recently increased role in providing support services to USAID, is expanding the importance of coordination between USAID's EXO and the embassy's Management section.


== Budget ==

The Congressional Research Service (CRS) states that some USAID appropriations were programmed collaboratively with the Department of State, which makes any calculation of the USAID budget imprecise, and the CRS generally refers to USAID-managed funds. The CRS stated USAID managed more than $40 billion of combined appropriations in 2023, and had a workforce of more than 10,000. The mean average managed foreign assistance disbursed in the fiscal years 2001 to 2024 was $22.9 billion in inflation adjusted to 2023 dollars; 2023 was an exceptional year because of an extra $16 billion of funds for Ukraine.
The U.S. government USAspending.gov website included International Security Assistance, Special Assistance Initiatives and a small amount of other spending alongside direct USAID spending in its assessment of the 2023 $50.1 billion of budgetary resources available to USAID, about $10 billion more than the headline CRS assessment. International Security Assistance was budgeted about $9 billion in 2023, of which Foreign Military Financing to strengthen military support of key U.S. allies and partner governments was $6 billion.
In fiscal year 2022, the cost of supplying USAID's assistance includes the agency's "Operating Expenses" of $1.97 billion, and "Bilateral Economic Assistance" program costs of $25.01 billion (the vast bulk of which was administered by USAID). In fiscal year 2012, "Operating Expenses" were $1.53 billion, and "Bilateral Economic Assistance" was $20.83 billion.
U.S. assistance budget totals were shown along with other countries' total assistance budgets in tables in a webpage of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
At the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, most of the world's governments adopted a program for action under the auspices of the United Nations Agenda 21, which included an Official Development Assistance (ODA) aid target of 0.7% of gross national product (GNP) for rich nations, specified as roughly 22 members of the OECD and known as the Development Assistance Committee (DAC). Most countries do not adhere to this target, as the OECD's table indicates that the DAC average ODA in 2011 was 0.31% of GNP. The U.S. figure for 2011 was 0.20% of GNP, which still left the U.S. as the largest single source of ODA among individual countries. According to the OECD, The United States' total official development assistance (ODA) (US$55.3 billion, preliminary data) increased in 2022, mainly due to support to Ukraine, as well as increased costs for in-donor refugees from Afghanistan. ODA represented 0.22% of gross national income (GNI).


== US public opinion ==
According to a 2010 poll, the median American believed that 25% of the federal budget goes to foreign aid and that it should be 10%. In reality, between 0.8% and 1.4% of the U.S. federal budget has gone to foreign aid since 2001. The USAID portion of the federal budget is even smaller, accounting for 0.6% in 2023.
In a 2019 poll of the American public, 35% said more money should be spent on foreign aid, 33% said spending should stay about the same, and 28% said less money should be spent.
A 2025 poll revealed that 50% of Americans believed that the US should play a major or leading role in improving health in developing countries, with 36% preferring a minor role and 14% preferring no role at all. However, the same poll also revealed that 43% of Americans thought that "too much" US funding was being given to these initiatives.
A February 2025 poll by the University of Maryland's Program for Public Consultation found that, after presented with arguments for and against closure, 58% of Americans supported continuing USAID compared to 41% supporting abolition. Another poll by Ipsos found that just 37% supported Trump's efforts to dismantle the agency while 58% opposed the efforts.


== Activities by region ==


=== Haiti ===
Following the January 2010 earthquake in Haiti, USAID helped provide safer housing for almost 200,000 displaced Haitians; supported vaccinations for more than 1 million people; cleared more than 1.3 million cubic meters of the approximately 10 million cubic meters of rubble generated; helped more than 10,000 farmers double the yields of staples like corn, beans, and sorghum; and provided short-term employment to more than 350,000 Haitians, injecting more than $19 million into the local economy. USAID has provided nearly $42 million to help combat cholera, helping to decrease the number of cases requiring hospitalization and reduce the case fatality rate.


=== Afghanistan ===
With American entry into Afghanistan in 2001, USAID worked with the Department of State and Department of Defense to coordinate reconstruction efforts.


=== Iraq ===

The interactions between USAID and other U.S. government agencies in the period of planning the Iraq operation of 2003 are described by the Office of the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction in its book Hard Lessons: The Iraq Reconstruction Experience.
Subsequently, USAID played a major role in the U.S. reconstruction and development effort in Iraq. As of June 2009, USAID had invested approximately $6.6 billion on programs designed to stabilize communities; foster economic and agricultural growth; and build the capacity of the national, local, and provincial governments to represent and respond to the needs of the Iraqi people.
In June 2003, C-SPAN followed USAID administrator Andrew Natsios as he toured Iraq. The special program C-SPAN produced aired over four nights.


=== Lebanon ===
USAID has periodically supported the Lebanese American University and the American University of Beirut financially, with major contributions to the Lebanese American University's Campaign for Excellence.


=== Europe ===


==== Ukraine ====
In the twenty years prior to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine USAID dispersed modest funds, averaging $115 million, in Ukraine. Following the invasion Congress enacted large sums for Ukraine through USAID to support the operation of its government and civil society. In fiscal year 2022 nearly $9 billion was disbursed, and $16 billion in 2023 causing that year to be the highest total spending year for USAID with 36.6% of its managed funds being disbursed to Ukraine.


==== United Kingdom ====
USAID has donated funds to international charity BBC Media Action, with approximately $3.23 million (£2.6 million) given in 2024. This funding supports media development, journalism training, and public education initiatives in over 30 countries.


=== Cuba ===
A USAID subcontractor was arrested in Cuba in 2009 for distributing satellite equipment to provide Cubans with internet access. The subcontractor was released during Obama's second presidential term as part of the measures to improve relations between the two countries.
USAID has been used as a mechanism for "hastening transition", i.e., regime change in Cuba. Between 2009 and 2012, USAID ran a multimillion-dollar program, disguised as humanitarian aid and aimed at inciting rebellion in Cuba. The program consisted of two operations: one to establish an anti-regime social network called ZunZuneo, and the other to attract potential dissidents contacted by undercover operatives posing as tourists and aid workers.
USAID engineered a subversive program using social media aimed at fueling political unrest in Cuba to overthrow the Cuban government. On 3 April 2014 the Associated Press published an investigative report that revealed USAID was behind the creation of a social networking text messaging service aimed at creating political dissent and triggering an uprising against the Cuban government. The name of the messaging network was ZunZuneo, a Cuban slang term for a hummingbird's tweet and a play on "Twitter". According to the AP's report, the plan was to build an audience by initially presenting non-controversial content like sports, music and weather. Once a critical mass of users was reached the US government operators would change the content to spark political dissent and mobilize the users into organized political gatherings called "smart mobs" that would trigger an uprising against the Cuban government.
The messaging service was launched in 2010 and gained 40,000 followers at its peak. Extensive efforts were made to conceal the USAID involvement in the program, using offshore bank accounts, front companies and servers based overseas. According to a memo from one of the project's contractors, Mobile Accord: "There will be absolutely no mention of United States government involvement", "This is absolutely crucial for the long-term success of the service and to ensure the success of the Mission."
ZunZuneo's subscribers were never aware that it was created by the US government or that USAID was gathering their private data to gain useful demographics that would gauge their levels of dissent and help USAID "maximize our possibilities to extend our reach".
USAID officials realized they needed an exit strategy to conceal their involvement in the program, at one point seeking funding from Twitter cofounder Jack Dorsey as part of a plan for it to go independent. The service was abruptly closed down around mid-2012, which USAID said was due to the program running out of money.
The ZunZuneo operation was part of a program that included a second operation which started in October 2009 and was financed jointly with ZunZuneo. In the second operation, USAID sent Venezuelan, Costa Rican and Peruvian children to Cuba to recruit Cubans into anti-regime political activities. The operatives posed as traveling aid workers and tourists. In one of the covert operations, the workers formed a HIV prevention workshop, which leaked memos called "the perfect excuse" for the programme's political goals. The Guardian said the operation could undermine US efforts to work toward improving health globally.
The operation was also criticized for putting the undercover operatives themselves at risk. The covert operatives were given limited training about evading Cuban authorities suspicious of their actions. After Alan Gross, a development specialist and USAID subcontractor, was arrested in Cuba, the US government warned USAID about the safety of covert operatives. Regardless of safety concerns, USAID refused to end the operation.
In light of the AP's report, Rajiv Shah, the head of USAID, testified before the Senate Appropriations State Department and Foreign Operations Subcommittee on 8 April 2014.


=== Bolivia ===

USAID operated in the coca-growing Chapare region, including under a 1983 agreement to support crop-substitution programs to encourage other crops. No later than 1998, this funding was conditional on farmers eradicating all their coca plants. In 2008, the coca growers union affiliated with Bolivian president Evo Morales ejected the 100 employees and contractors from USAID working in the Chapare region, citing frustration with U.S. efforts to persuade them to switch to growing unviable alternatives. Other rules, such as the requirement that participating communities declare themselves "terrorist-free zones" as required by U.S. law irritated people, said Kathryn Ledebur, director of the Andean Information Network. "Eradicate all your coca and then you grow an orange tree that will get fruit in eight years but you don't have anything to eat in the meantime? A bad idea. The thing about kicking out USAID, I don't think it's an anti-American sentiment overall but rather a rejection of bad programs."
Also in 2008, USAID's Bolivian programs under the Office of Transitional Initiatives and the Democracy Program, as well as separate funding by the National Endowment for Democracy, were the subject of critical investigative reports that documented them supporting political initiatives in regions governed by separatist movements. During the September 2008 political crisis, President Evo Morales expelled US ambassador Philip S. Goldberg and spoke out against USAID interference. The US government had previously ended OTI spending in Bolivia and subsequently redirected Democracy Program funds to other purposes, while denying USAID had interfered in Bolivian politics.
President Evo Morales expelled USAID from Bolivia on May 1, 2013, for allegedly seeking to undermine his government following ten years of operations within the country. At the time, the USAID had seven American staffers and 37 Bolivian staffers in the country, with an annual budget of $26.7 million. President Morales explained that the expulsion was because USAID's objectives in Bolivia were to advance American interests, not to advance the interests of the Bolivian people. More specifically, President Morales noted the American "counter-narcotic" programs that harms the interests of Bolivian coca farmers who get caught in the middle of American operations.
Following the 2019 Bolivian political crisis that saw Jeanine Áñez's assumption of power, President Áñez invited USAID to return to Bolivia to provide "technical aid to the electoral process in Bolivia". In October 2020, USAID provided $700,000 in emergency assistance in fighting wildfires to the government of Luis Arce.


=== Brazil ===
During the Brazilian military dictatorship, the organization launched MEC-USAID Agreements, responsible for transforming the Brazilian education policies closer to the USA. USAID also acted in the countries public security. Between 1960 and 1972, USAID trained cops that were involved in political repression in Brazil.
Folha de S.Paulo, Brazil's largest newspaper, accused USAID of trying to influence political reform in Brazil in a way that would have purposely benefited right-wing parties. USAID spent $95,000 US in 2005 on a seminar in the Brazilian Congress to promote a reform aimed at pushing for legislation punishing party infidelity. According to USAID papers acquired by Folha under the Freedom of Information Act, the seminar was planned to coincide with the eve of talks in that country's Congress on a broad political reform. The papers read that although the "pattern of weak party discipline is found across the political spectrum, it is somewhat less true of parties on the liberal left, such as the [ruling] Worker's Party." The papers also expressed a concern about the "'indigenization' of the conference so that it is not viewed as providing a U.S. perspective." The event's main sponsor was the International Republican Institute.
In February 2025, Michael Benz, a former state department official, affirmed in an interview with Steve Bannon on The War Room that Bolsonaro was seen in USAID as "Tropical Trump" and "if USAID didn't exist, Bolsonaro would still be the president of Brazil". In February 3, Eduardo Bolsonaro, federal deputy and son of Jair Bolsonaro, answered Benz in his social media by, accusing USAID of financing institutions involved with fighting against fake news during the presidential elections in 2022, such as the International Center for Journalists, Sleeping Giants Brazil and Vero Institute, created by the YouTuber Felipe Neto, with the objective of "manipulating narratives and interfering with Brazilian democracy". He and Gustavo Gayer also began to collect signatures to open a Parliamentary Inquiry Commission to investigate the supposed interference. His accusations are largely considered as fake news and many of the accused institutions affirmed that they never received money from USAID. Shortly after, in a speech for the Ação Política Conservadora, President of Argentina Javier Milei alleged without evidence that USAID used millions of dollars to falsify the 2022 election.


=== East Africa ===
On September 19, 2011, USAID and the Ad Council launched the "Famine, War, and Drought" (FWD) campaign to raise awareness about that year's severe drought in East Africa. Through TV and internet ads as well as social media initiatives, FWD encouraged Americans to spread awareness about the crisis, support the humanitarian organizations that were conducting relief operations, and consult the Feed the Future global initiative for broader solutions. Celebrities Geena Davis, Uma Thurman, Josh Hartnett and Chanel Iman took part in the campaign via a series of public service announcements. Corporations like Cargill, General Mills, and PepsiCo also signed on to support FWD.
After the Trump administration's termination of most of USAID's programs in early 2025, during an Ebola outbreak in Uganda, USAID-funded research efforts into Ebola treatment and prevention were halted in Uganda. During the previous Ebola outbreak in Uganda in 2022, USAID had funded contact tracing efforts, the supply of protective equipment, safe burials, etc.


=== Palestinian territories ===
USAID halted its assistance to the West Bank and Gaza Strip on January 31, 2019, reportedly at the request of the Palestinian Authority. The request was related to new U.S. legislation, the Anti-Terrorism Clarification Act of 2018, that exposed foreign aid recipients to anti-terrorism lawsuits. USAID restarted assistance to Palestinians in April 2021 under President Biden. The agency increased assistance during the Israel–Gaza war that began in October 2023. Since October 7, 2023, USAID gave more than $2.1 billion in assistance to Palestinians. On November 10, 2023, more than 1,000 USAID employees signed an open letter calling for an immediate ceasefire in the war.


=== Vietnam ===
USAID, alongside the Department of State and Defence, has supported NGOs to removing UXO and landmines, and remediating soil contaminated by Agent Orange from multiple regions in Vietnam, as well as supporting victims of Agent Orange.


== Personnel who died in the course of their work ==


== Concerns and criticism ==
U.S. foreign economic assistance has been the subject of debate and criticism since at least the 1950s.


=== Claims of wasteful spending ===

In 2025, the Trump administration accused USAID of "wasting massive sums of taxpayer money" over several decades, including during Trump's first presidency from 2017 to 2021. The administration cited a number of projects, including $1.5 million for LGBT workplace inclusion in Serbia, $2.5 million to build electric vehicle chargers in Vietnam, $6 million for tourism promotion in Egypt, and "hundreds of millions of dollars" (the largest item) purportedly allocated to discourage Afghanistan farmers from growing poppies for opium, which allegedly ended up supporting poppy cultivation and benefiting the Taliban. Fact checkers found that these claims were largely false or "highly misleading". According to the World Health Organization, the closure of health clinics in 31 out of 34 provinces in Afghanistan has contributed to a growing humanitarian crisis. The situation is further compounded by widespread poverty and the continued presence of infectious diseases such as measles, malaria, and polio.
On February 3, 2025, White House press secretary Karoline Leavitt criticized four expenditures putatively uncovered by DOGE. Fact-checkers found that several of the alleged wasteful grants were actually administered by the State Department, not USAID. U.S. District Judge Carl Nichols, in his February 2025 order blocking the Trump administration from placing certain USAID employees on leave, "noted that despite Trump's claim of massive 'corruption and fraud' in the agency, government lawyers had no support for that argument in court."
During Trump's first term, his daughter Ivanka Trump, who served as Advisor to the President, used over $11,000 from USAID in 2019 to purchase video recording and reproducing equipment for a White House event. Both Ivanka and then-First Lady Melania Trump had publicly praised USAID's work during the first Trump administration. Melania Trump visited Africa in 2018, speaking about USAID's efforts and stating, "We care, and we want to show the world that we care, and I've partnered and am working with USAID." Ivanka Trump also toured Africa on behalf of USAID, lauding her father's creation of the "Women's Global Development and Prosperity" initiative and emphasizing its alignment with U.S. national security interests.
In February 2025, following the allegations of fraud, the White House announced a plan to reduce USAID's staff from over 10,000 employees to fewer than 300. Critics, including former USAID administrators, decried this move, calling it "one of the worst and most costly foreign policy blunders in U.S. history", and have argued that the cuts will result in job losses, damage to American businesses, and harm to vulnerable populations worldwide. The inspector general for USAID issued a report on the spending pause and staff furloughs noting that these actions limited USAID's efforts to assure that its distributed funds "do not benefit terrorists and their supporters". The inspector general also warned that $489 million in humanitarian food aid was at risk of spoiling due to staff furloughs and unclear guidance. The Office of Presidential Personnel fired the inspector general the next day, despite a law requiring 30 days notice to Congress before firing an Inspector General.


=== Bribery scheme involving $550 million in contracts ===
In June 2025, a former USAID officer plead guilty to accepting bribes in exchange for manipulating the contracting process. Three executives of two separate companies, Apprio and Vistant, also plead guilty.  The bribes began in 2013 and included such items as cash, laptops, NBA suite tickets, a country club wedding, mortgage down payments, phones, and jobs for relatives. These allegedly totaled more than $1 million. In exchange, the USAID officer used his position to recommend Apprio and Vistant for non-competitive awards, leaked sensitive information, provided favorable evaluations, and approved contract decisions. The total value of these contracts was approximately $550 million.


=== Non-career contracts ===
USAID frequently contracted with private firms or individuals for specialist services lasting from a few weeks to several years. It has long been asked whether USAID should more often assign such tasks to career U.S. government employees instead. United States government staff directly performed technical assistance in the earliest days of the program in the 1940s. It soon became necessary for the federal government technical experts to plan and manage larger assistance programs than they could perform by themselves. The global expansion of technical assistance in the early 1950s reinforced the need to draw on outside experts, which was also accelerated by Congress's requirement of major reductions of U.S. government staffing in 1953. By 1955, observers commented on a perceived shift toward re use of shorter-term contracts (rather than using employees with career-length contracts).


=== Financial conflicts of interest ===
USAID stated that "U.S. foreign assistance has always had the twofold purpose of furthering America's foreign policy interests in expanding democracy and free markets while improving the lives of the citizens of the developing world." In 2008, a report found that approximately 40% of aid money spent in Afghanistan had returned to donor countries through corporate profits, consultants' salaries, and other costs.
Although USAID officially selects contractors on a competitive and objective basis, watchdog groups, politicians, foreign governments, and corporations have occasionally accused the agency of allowing its bidding process to be unduly influenced by the political and financial interests of its current presidential administration. Under the Bush administration, for instance, it emerged that all five implementing partners selected to bid on a $600 million Iraq reconstruction contract enjoyed close ties to the administration.
In 2020, one of the contractors for USAID, DAI Global, was sued by families of soldiers who had died in Afghanistan.


=== Political operations abroad ===
Critics have accused USAID of being a tool for US interventionism.
Additionally, the agency has been accused of covert political operations abroad, allegedly collaborating with the CIA on regime-change efforts and controversial funding decisions, leading to strained relations with some foreign governments.

William Blum has said that in the 1960s and early 1970s, USAID has maintained "a close working relationship with the CIA, and Agency officers often operated abroad under USAID cover." The 1960s-era Office of Public Safety, a now-disbanded division of USAID, has been mentioned as an example of this, having served as a front for training foreign police in counterinsurgency methods (including torture techniques).
In 2008, Benjamin Dangl wrote in The Progressive that the Bush administration was using USAID to fund efforts in Bolivia to "undermine the Morales government and coopt the country's dynamic social movements – just as it has tried to do recently in Venezuela and traditionally throughout Latin America".
From 2010 to 2012, the agency operated ZunZuneo, a social media site similar to Twitter in an attempt to instigate uprisings against the Cuban government. Its involvement was concealed in order to ensure mission success. The plan was to draw in users with non-controversial content until a critical mass is reached, after which more political messaging would be introduced. At its peak, more than 40,000 unsuspecting Cubans interacted on the platform.
In the summer of 2012, ALBA countries (Venezuela, Cuba, Ecuador, Bolivia, Nicaragua, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Dominica, Antigua and Barbuda) called on its members to expel USAID from their countries.
A Macedonia political activist, in an editorial, wrote about USAID working behind the scenes from 2012-2017 as part of an effort to get Macedonia to change its name to North Macedonia. This name change happened in 2019, and was a condition for Greece to support North Macedonia’s membership in NATO.


=== Influence on the United Nations ===
Studies have found correlations between U.S. foreign aid levels and nations' membership on the United Nations Security Council, suggesting the use of aid to influence council votes.
In 1990, after Yemen voted against a resolution for a U.S.-led coalition to use force against Iraq, U.S. ambassador to the UN Thomas Pickering told Yemen's UN Ambassador Abdullah Saleh al-Ashtal, "That's the most expensive No vote you ever cast." Within days, USAID ceased operations and funding in Yemen.


=== State Department terrorist list ===
USAID required NGOs to sign a document renouncing terrorism, as a condition of funding. Issam Abdul Rahman, media coordinator for the Palestinian Non-Governmental Organizations' Network, a body representing 135 NGOs in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, said his organization "takes issue with politically conditioned funding". Also, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, listed as a terrorist organization by the US Department of State, said that the USAID condition was nothing more than an attempt "to impose political solutions prepared in the kitchens of Western intelligence agencies to weaken the rights and principles of Palestinians, especially the right of return."


=== Renouncing prostitution and sex trafficking ===
In 2003, Congress passed a law providing U.S. government funds to private groups to help fight AIDS and other diseases all over the world through USAID grants. One of the conditions imposed by the law on grant recipients was a requirement to have "a policy explicitly opposing prostitution and sex trafficking". In 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Agency for International Development v. Alliance for Open Society International, Inc. that the requirement violated the First Amendment's prohibition against compelled speech.


=== Involvement in Peru's forced sterilizations ===

For three decades, USAID has been the principal foreign donor to family planning in Peru. Until the 1990s, the Peruvian government's commitment to providing family planning services was limited. In 1998, concerns arose regarding the involvement of USAID in forced sterilization campaigns in Peru. Some politicians in Washington opposed USAID's funding of family planning initiatives in the country. In January 1998, David Morrison, from the U.S.-based NGO Population Research Institute (PRI), traveled to Peru to investigate claims of human rights abuses related to these programs. During his visit, Morrison gathered testimony from Peruvian politicians and other figures opposed to family planning but did not meet with USAID officials in Peru. Upon his return to the United States, the PRI submitted its findings to U.S. congressman Chris Smith, a member of the Republican Party, urging for the suspension of USAID's family planning efforts in Peru. Smith subsequently dispatched a member of his staff to Peru for further investigation.
In February 1998, another U.S. organization, the Latin American Alliance for the Family, sent its director to Peru to examine the situation, again without consulting USAID officials. On February 25, 1998, a subcommittee of the U.S. House Committee on International Relations, chaired by Smith, held a hearing on "the Peruvian population control program". Allegations that USAID was funding forced sterilizations in Peru prompted Congressman Todd Tiahrt to introduce the "Tiahrt Amendment" in 1998. However, the subcommittee concluded that USAID's funding had not supported the abuses committed by the Peruvian government.


=== Office of Inspector General investigation into alleged terror-linked funding ===
According to a February 2024 report, the USAID's Office of Inspector General launched an investigation in 2023 into the agency for awarding $110,000 in 2021 to Helping Hand for Relief and Development (HHRD), a charity in Michigan that Republicans on the House Foreign Affairs Committee have accused in recent years of sharing ties to terrorism organizations in South Asia. In August 2023, USAID's Vetting Support Unit cleared HHRD to receive the grant. In 2024, researchers at George Mason University reported that allegations against HHRD were part of a campaign targeting large American Muslim charities based on the manipulation of poorly-sourced information.


== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Sources ==
Andrews, Stanley (1970). "Oral History Interview with Stanley Andrews". Harry S. Truman Library. Retrieved June 15, 2017.
Bollen, Kenneth; Paxton, Pamela; Morishima, Rumi (June 2005). "Assessing International Evaluations: An Example From USAID's Democracy and Governance Program". American Journal of Evaluation. 26 (2): 189–203. doi:10.1177/1098214005275640.
Center for American Progress (August 14, 2008). "U.S. Aid to Afghanistan by the Numbers". Retrieved June 13, 2017.
Center for American Progress (August 21, 2008). "U.S. Aid to Pakistan by the Numbers". Retrieved June 13, 2017.
Dwight D. Eisenhower Library (August 2001). "Documents relating to foreign aid, 1948–90: Deposited by Albert H. Huntington Jr" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on April 12, 2019. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
Hessmiller, Rose (January 10, 2013). "White Paper: U.S. Foreign Aid Meeting the Challenges of the Twenty-first Century". Natural Resources Management and Development Portal. USAID. Archived from the original on March 6, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2019.
Johnston, Jake; Main, Alexander (April 2013). "Breaking Open the Black Box: Increasing Aid Transparency and Accountability in Haiti" (PDF). cepr.net. Center for Economic and Policy Research. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
Millikan, M. F.; Rostow, W. W. (1957). A proposal : key to an effective foreign policy. New York: Harper & Bros.
Moseley, William G. (August 8, 2006). "America's lost vision: The demise of development". The New York Times. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
National Research Council (2008). Improving Democracy Assistance: Building Knowledge Through Evaluations and Research. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. ISBN 978-0-309-11736-4.
Shah, Arup (September 28, 2014). "Foreign Aid for Development Assistance". Global Issues. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
Tarnoff, Curt (July 21, 2015). U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID): Background, Operations, and Issues (Report).
USAID (April 1995). "Historical Bibliography of the United States Agency for International Development" (PDF). PN-ABU-368. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 4, 2006. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
USAID (August 4, 2011). "Policy Framework for Bilateral Foreign Aid – Mandatory Reference for ADS Chapter 101 and 201" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on April 12, 2019. Retrieved February 25, 2019.
USAID. "The Automated Directives System (ADS)". Operational Policy (ADS). Archived from the original on June 11, 2012. Retrieved June 21, 2017.
USAID (January 2006). "USAID Primer: What We Do and How We Do It" (PDF). PD-ACG-100. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 23, 2006. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
USAID (2016). U.S. Overseas Loans and Grants: Obligations and Loan Authorizations, July 1, 1945 – September 30, 2015 (Report). PB-AAF-100. Archived from the original on June 27, 2017. Retrieved June 13, 2017.
U.S. Department of State (June 1961). Highlights of President Kennedy's New Act for International Development (PDF). PC-AAB-618. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 26, 2007. Retrieved June 13, 2017.


== Further reading ==
Bingham, Jonathan Brewster (1953). Shirt-Sleeve Diplomacy: Point 4 in Action. John Day & Co.
Fiscal Year 2024 Agency Financial Report (PDF) (Report). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Agency for International Development. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 1, 2025.


== External links ==

United States Agency for International Development at the Wayback Machine (archived January 29, 2025)
Official website
Office of Inspector General, U.S. Agency for International Development
Agency for International Development in the Federal Register
Agency for International Development on USAspending.gov
Records of the Agency for International Development (1935–89) in the National Archives