Waste characterisation (or waste characterization in the United States) is the process by which the composition of different waste streams is separated, "separate collection," and analyzed. Waste characterisation plays an essential part in waste treatment, which may occur. Developers of new waste technologies must analyze and evaluate what waste streams consist of to offer proper treatment. The biodegradable element of the waste stream is vital in systems such as composting or anaerobic digestion. 
Waste characterisation is a manual process carried out beside waste management plants. It consists of taking a tonne from a garbage truck, dividing the sample into four parts, mixing them, dividing again into four parts, and taking one of them (250kg) to analyze manually. This process takes around 3-4 hours to complete and generally involves 2-4 people.
Even if this process is carried out very frequently (usually every 2 or 3 days), it is only a sample of the waste composition. Solid material waste is classified in material recovery facilities with mechanical tools (magnetic for metal, air pumps for plastic films, ramps for rolling objects, etc.), and the contents of the garbage truck are unknown until the process takes place.
The Nine Major Waste Characterisations: 

Paper and paperboard
Glass
Metal
Plastic
Textiles
Organics
Construction and Demolition (C &D)
Special Care
Other

Municipal waste streams are commonly broken down into the following constituents: 

Film plastic-LDPE
Dense plastic-HDPE, PET
Ferrous metal
Non-ferrous metals
Glass
Textiles
"Other" any remaining items which do not fit
Biodegradable Fraction:  

Glass
Paper & cardboard
Garden waste or green waste
Fines (items below a certain screen size)
Food


== The European Waste Catalogue ==
Overview
The European Waste Catalogue (EWC) refers to a set (non-exhaustive) list of wastes from households and businesses inside the European Union.The EWC is a code (six numbers in three sets of two) that adequately describes the waste transported, handled, or treated. The EWC is where Duty of Care Notices or Waste Transfer Notes are passed between waste management companies and waste carriers to report volumes received or treated back to the governing agency (such as the Environment Agency in England and Wales, Scottish Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA) in Scotland, Northern Ireland (NI) Environment Agency, etc.).
Typical Waste Characterisation & Reporting
The first step in characterising waste is to decide on the appropriate EWC code. These codes carry three categories - absolute non-hazardous, mirror entries, and absolute hazardous. The initial assessment for the majority of wastes follows a simple derivation of industry (twenty main categories) from which they were obtained (agricultural, woodworking (furniture), electronics, etc.). Each derived section is denoted by the first two sets of two numbers, referring to a particular industry or sector. The final set of two numbers relates directly to the waste. The waste is hazardous by its very composition. An asterisk follows behind the EWC. 
Each member state's Environment Agency throughout the European Union must adopt the EWC in its reporting methods and enforce its use by the respective waste management sector. The lists are available through the European Commission's website. Submissions by Waste Management Companies to their respective member states' Environmental Agencies are collated, in many instances, by conversion to EWC STAT (European Waste Catalogue for Statistics) for submission to the EU, which oversees all member states and ensures compliance with unilaterally agreed standards and recycling rates.
Waste Entries 
Waste entries are hazardous, not by the composition of the waste, but by virtue of the process that produced it. The same is true for non-hazardous absolute entries. Mirror entries can be hazardous or non-hazardous, depending on the waste composition.
Deciding whether a mirror entry is hazardous or non-hazardous by composition involves the usage of the Approved Supply List (ASL). A substance not listed in the ASL permits other sources, such as Manufacturer's Safety Data Sheets (MSDS), to classify the waste. These documents contain "Risk Phrase," which describes the hazards that the substance or substances present. Risk phrases have threshold values that indicate what concentration of a substance must be present for the waste to be classified as hazardous by the Hazard Code attached to the Risk Phrase.
Examples of Waste Characterisations
- How is a waste characterisation study? 
- What is a waste characterisation study? 
- Webinar: Best Practices for Waste Characterization 


== See also ==
List of waste treatment technologies


== References ==