Barenaked Ladies (BNL) are a Canadian rock band which was formed in 1988 in the Toronto suburb of Scarborough, Ontario. The band developed a following in Canada, with their self-titled 1991 cassette becoming the first independent release certified gold in Canada. They had mainstream success in Canada after signing to  Reprise Records in 1992 with their debut album Gordon (with singles including "If I Had $1000000" and "Brian Wilson"). The band's popularity eventually spread to the US with versions of "Brian Wilson" and "The Old Apartment" from their 1996 live album, Rock Spectacle, followed by their 1998 fourth studio album Stunt. The album contained their highest-charting hit, "One Week", along with "It's All Been Done" and "Call and Answer". Their fifth album, Maroon (and lead single "Pinch Me"), also charted well. The band is also known for creating and performing the theme song of the American sitcom The Big Bang Theory. The band has continued to regularly tour and record new music, having released 14 primary studio albums of original material and three themed studio albums.
Initially a duo of singer-guitarists Ed Robertson and Steven Page, the band grew to a quintet by 1990, adding brothers Jim and Andy Creeggan on bass and keyboards/congas, respectively, and drummer Tyler Stewart. Andy Creeggan left the band in 1995, and was replaced by multi-instrumentalist Kevin Hearn. Page left in 2009, reducing the group to a quartet.
The band's style has evolved, and its music (originally acoustic) grew to encompass a mixture of pop, rock and folk. Their live performances feature comedic banter and freestyle rapping between songs. They have received a number of Juno Awards, and have been nominated for two Grammy Awards. The group has sold over 15 million albums and singles, and was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame in March 2018.


== History ==


=== Origins (1988–1991) ===

Barenaked Ladies began as a duo of Ed Robertson and Steven Page. Both attended Churchill Heights Public School and met after a Peter Gabriel concert; they were counsellors at Interprovincial Music Camp in McKellar, Ontario. Page was impressed by Robertson's harmonizing when they began playing songs together. While attending a Bob Dylan concert at Exhibition Stadium, they decided on the name "Barenaked Ladies."
They first performed a largely-improvised set during a battle of the bands at Nathan Phillips Square for the Second Harvest food bank on 1 October 1988. The duo opened for the Razorbacks and others, developing their improvised set to include comedy, songs, and audience interactions.
Page and Robertson continued performing, and began writing songs together. Their first tape, Buck Naked (1989), was made with a four-track recorder in basements and bedrooms. They became followers of the comedy group Corky and the Juice Pigs, whom they credited with exposing them to a comedic stage presence. Page and Robertson presented the group with their tape, and were invited to open for the Juice Pigs on their national tour. Page and Robertson invited two friends from music camp, brothers Andy Creeggan (percussion) and Jim Creeggan (bass), to play with them at a 1989 Toronto Christmas show. With the Creeggan brothers, Barenaked Lunch (also known as The Pink Tape) was released in 1990.

Andy Creeggan left for a student-exchange trip to South America six months later, leaving the band without a percussionist. They met drummer Tyler Stewart in Waterloo, Ontario in the summer of 1990, and he joined the band. The band received attention during Andy Creeggan's absence, receiving the 1990 YTV Achievement Award for Best Band/Musical Group and squeezing into a Speaker's Corner video booth to perform "Be My Yoko Ono". Andy Creeggan returned in early 1991, playing keyboards, congas and other percussion instruments, and the band soon began their first Canadian tour.


=== Early Canadian success (1991–1992) ===
Their first commercial release was 1991's The Yellow Tape. A demo tape created for South by Southwest, it was the first recording with all five members and was turned down by every Canadian record label. They sold copies off the stage; people began asking for the tape at local stores, and it was released commercially. Sales increased due to word of mouth and the band's live shows. Page's father, Victor, founded the independent label Page Publications to manufacture and distribute the cassette.
The band received radio airplay with a live cover of Dean Friedman's "McDonald's Girl", which included a rap break incorporating lyrics from the Beastie Boys' "Hey Ladies". Barenaked Ladies contributed a cover of Bruce Cockburn's "Lovers in a Dangerous Time" to the Cockburn tribute album Kick at the Darkness in November 1991, and it was the band's first Top 40 hit in Canada.

The band was removed from the lineup of the 1991 New Year's Eve concert in Nathan Phillips Square outside Toronto City Hall because a staffer for Mayor June Rowlands believed that its name objectified women, a decision affirmed by city councillor Chris Korwin-Kuczynski. The group booked another show at McMaster University. By February 1992, The Yellow Tape outsold Michael Jackson's Dangerous, Genesis' We Can't Dance, and U2's Achtung Baby at some downtown Toronto record stores. MuchMusic offered the band its second Intimate and Interactive special on 17 January and the tape was the first indie release to go platinum in Canada, selling 100,000 copies.
By the end of February, the Toronto City Council revised its rules for event bookings at Nathan Phillips Square. The City Hall story has followed the band, with Robertson crediting it to a slow news week.


=== First albums (1992–1997) ===

Barenaked Ladies were signed to Sire Records in April 1992. They performed at Toronto's Ontario Place Forum the following month, and were the quickest act to sell out the venue.
The band's first full album, Gordon, was released in July 1992 and was successful in Canada; by the end of August, it had been certified platinum. The album included some of the band's best-known songs, including "Enid", the first single; "Be My Yoko Ono", which helped fund the album; "If I Had $1000000", spawning a practice of throwing Kraft Dinner during live shows which the band later discouraged; and "Brian Wilson", named after Beach Boy Brian Wilson (who covered the song on a live album). A number of Gordon's songs were live favourites, and had already been recorded. Although the band was doing well in Canada, US success was elusive.
Their second album, Maybe You Should Drive (1994), was less popular in Canada. The band's US tour lost money, despite an appearance on Late Night with Conan O'Brien. Before the next release, Andy Creeggan decided to leave the band; he had become disillusioned with its direction, and was uncomfortable with their new fame. According to Page, Creeggan had considered leaving during rehearsals for Drive; the band convinced him to stay to record that album and for its subsequent tour. Creeggan wanted to study music at McGill University. Tyler Stewart has suggested that Creeggan had never fully accepted his replacement as a percussionist. He left when band members were tiring of one other, with Page and Robertson rarely communicating; Stewart cites Creeggan's departure as worsening the situation. Page developed alcohol abuse and depression. To reverse their fortunes, they signed with Terry McBride and Nettwerk for management.
The band released Born on a Pirate Ship as a quartet in 1996. The album's "Shoe Box" was included on the Friends soundtrack, and the Jason Priestley-directed video for "The Old Apartment" received notable US airplay. Although the album had better sales than Maybe You Should Drive, it did not match the success of "Gordon". Barenaked Ladies appeared on an episode of Beverly Hills, 90210 ("Spring Breakdown") performed "The Old Apartment", "Life, In a Nutshell", and "Brian Wilson" at the Peach Pit After Dark night club. Tyler Stewart invited his friend Kevin Hearn to replace Andy Creeggan as a keyboardist for the tour, and Hearn joined the band full time. They had a cameo appearance in the Canadian film The Wrong Guy with Dave Foley in 1997, performing "Gangster Girl".
Barenaked Ladies recorded two dates on their 1996 Born on a Pirate Ship tour and released Rock Spectacle, a live album with a modest American radio hit in "Brian Wilson". The album was their first US gold record, and they saw their next one as a chance to make it big in the States.


=== US success (1998–2004) ===
Stunt (1998) was the band's greatest mainstream success; its single, "One Week", spent (coincidentally) one week atop the Billboard Hot 100. Stunt reached number three on the US  Billboard 200 and number nine in Canada. Kevin Hearn was diagnosed with leukemia shortly after the album was released. He received bone marrow transplants from his brother and missed most of the Stunt tour.

The band toured with friends Chris Brown and Greg Kurstin filling in on keyboards until Hearn recovered enough to rejoin them on tour. The singles "It's All Been Done" (the opening theme of the animated television series Baby Blues) and "Call and Answer" (which appeared in the film EdTV) were modest hits. The band was asked to contribute a song ("Get in Line") to the soundtrack of the Fox animated series King of the Hill. 
Led by the single "Pinch Me", Maroon (2000) reached number five on the Billboard Top 100 and topped the Canadian charts. A compilation album, Disc One: All Their Greatest Hits (1991–2001), was released in 2001. After finishing a tour on 31 December 2001 in Rosemont, Illinois to promote the compilation, the band decided to take a year off (with a performance at the 2002 Winter Olympics' Medals Plaza) before returning to the studio in April 2003.
Everything to Everyone was released on 21 October of that year, coinciding with the start of their Peep Show tour. The album's first single was "Another Postcard (Chimps)", which received some radio play. "Testing 1,2,3", the second single, had a video but no CD single; "Celebrity" was released in the UK with a CD single, but no video. "Maybe Katie" and an edited version of "For You", from a concert in Glasgow, were released as radio singles. The album, their weakest seller in years, fulfilled their contract with Reprise Records. The group was independent for the first time since 1992, although they retained a distribution relationship with Warner Bros. Records. On its early-2004 Everywhere For Everyone tour, the band began offering live shows and subsequent studio releases for purchase as a download or CD-R on its website.


=== Return to independence (2004–2008) ===

The band's next album was Barenaked for the Holidays, released on 5 October 2004. It was their first independent record since The Yellow Tape and the first album recorded at Fresh Baked Woods, Page's recently-completed farmhouse studio. The band established the Desperation Records label for this album.
They taped a January 2005 television pilot for a variety show, tentatively entitled Barenaked Ladies Variety Show, which was rejected by the Fox network. Later that year, they were asked to write music for the Stratford Festival of Canada's musical production of Shakespeare's As You Like It. Page wrote most of the music (Shakespeare had provided lyrics in the play), and the band recorded it for the actors to sing over. The recording (with Page's vocals) was available on CD from the festival and on the band's website. On 2 July, they participated in the Barrie, Ontario Live 8 concert.

The band released Snacktime!, an album of original material for children, on 6 May 2008. The album contains artwork by Hearn in its liner notes, which is also available in hardcover-book form with a CD included. The album was promoted with a series of television and in-store appearances at bookstores in Toronto and the US northeast and West Coast. They cancelled appearances at several Disney Music Block Party concerts after Page's arrest for cocaine possession. Robertson crashed his single-engine plane in August, and his mother died that December.


=== Departure of Page (2009–2011) ===
On 24 February 2009, Barenaked Ladies and Steven Page announced separately that Page had left the band by "mutual agreement." The remaining members continued as a quartet; Page pursued solo projects, including theatrical opportunities. In July, it was announced that the band had left its Nettwerk management and hired the newly merged management firm CAM 8.
Robertson said about the departure of one of the band's founding members,

Our relationship with Steve Page was great and very fruitful. It lasted almost 20 years, but it was time to move on. Now we're doing something that feels really fresh and exciting to me. His departure left four singers and three multi-instrumentalists in the band, so we're not lacking for musical ideas, and now there's more room for the other writers in the band to bring songs to the table.
As a quartet, Barenaked Ladies began recording a new album in May 2009 with producer Michael Phillip Wojewoda. "You Run Away", the album's lead single, was released to Canadian radio on 8 January. All in Good Time was released on 23 March 2010 in Canada and on 30 March in the US. Barenaked Ladies announced on 6 January 2010 that the band and Raisin' Records (their label) had signed a worldwide distribution agreement with EMI Label Services. 
All in Good Time was generally well-received by critics. The band toured the U.S. and Canada during the summer of 2010, with an autumn leg in the United Kingdom. Asked about Page's departure, Tyler Stewart said: "We don't keep in touch, but we certainly we [sic] wish him the best, and there's good will there." In October 2010, Page said that he had no imminent plans to rejoin the band other than for a one-off performance. He added that it felt strange that the group continued to use the same name and perform the songs that he wrote and performed.
Page said in August 2011 that around the time of his arrest for cocaine possession, "the band was no longer the joyous place that it once was, but it hadn't been joyous for a long time before that. It wasn't that we didn't put on good shows, we still had a great time onstage every night". He added, "But it became a place where work was just about the stress and not the end product." TMZ uncovered court documents in September 2015 indicating that Page sued Robertson about the Big Bang Theory theme song, saying that he had been promised 20 percent of the proceeds but Robertson kept the money.


=== Since 2011 ===
The band released a second greatest-hits album, Hits from Yesterday & the Day Before, via Rhino Entertainment (a division of their former parent label, Warner Music Group) on 27 September 2011. Another Rhino album, Stop Us If You've Heard This One Before, with previously recorded but unreleased rarities, was planned for release later in 2011; it was released on 8 May 2012.
Barenaked Ladies were commissioned to compose the score for a musical based on National Lampoon's Animal House, but were dropped from the production by mid-2013. They returned to the studio in May 2012 to record a single, "Boomerang", produced by Gavin Brown. The song was planned for release during the summer of 2012 in conjunction with the band's Last Summer On Earth tour, during which it was performed nightly. Also performed on the late-2012 Symphony Barenaked Tour, it remained unreleased. 
The band entertained the possibility of abandoning the album concept and releasing only singles and EPs, but recorded Grinning Streak in February and March 2013; the album was released as on 4 June of that year. They signed with Vanguard Records for the release, their first label album of originals since becoming independent after 2003's Everything to Everyone. "Boomerang" was added to the new album, and was released as a single on 26 March 2013. Two other singles were released: "Odds Are" in late 2013, and "Did I Say That Out Loud?" in mid-2014. Each of the latter singles had a music video produced by Rooster Teeth Productions.
Barenaked Ladies began work on a new album in December 2014. The band's 11th studio album, Silverball, was released on 2 June 2015, three days before beginning its Last Summer on Earth 2015 tour with Violent Femmes and Colin Hay. The album's lead single, "Say What You Want", was released on 28 April 2015. The music video for the next single, "Duct Tape Heart", included footage of the band's performance at Red Rocks Amphitheatre on the Last Summer On Earth 2015 tour and was released on 19 October to coincide with the start of the Canadian leg of the Silverball tour.
They released their second live album, BNL Rocks Red Rocks, on 20 May 2016; it was recorded at Red Rocks Amphitheatre on the Last Summer on Earth 2015 tour. The band's Last Summer on Earth 2016 tour, with Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark and Howard Jones, coincided with the new live album. 
On 23–24 October 2016, Barenaked Ladies recorded an album with New York City a cappella group The Persuasions and producer Gavin Brown. The album, Ladies and Gentlemen: Barenaked Ladies and The Persuasions, contained new versions of Barenaked Ladies songs, one Kevin Hearn song, and one Persuasions song. It was released on 14 April 2017.
The band recorded its 12th studio album, Fake Nudes, in the winter of 2017. Its lead single, "Lookin' Up", and "Bringing It Home" were made available for download to those who pre-ordered the album. The album was released on 17 November 2017.
On 25 March 2018, the band was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame at the Juno Awards in Vancouver. They performed with former members Steven Page (who was included in the induction) and Andy Creeggan. It was Page's first performance with the band since his departure in 2009. Although he was at the ceremony, Andy Creeggan was not inducted into the Hall with the other five members. There are reportedly no plans for another reunion, but neither side has ruled it out.
In the summer of 2019, Barenaked Ladies took a break from their Last Summer On Earth tours and opened for Hootie and the Blowfish on their 44-date Group Therapy Tour. On 4 October of that year, Rhino Records released a greatest-hits collection entitled Original Hits, Original Stars on vinyl.
Robertson said on 14 January 2020 that he was working on songs for a new album, with a tour to follow supported by Gin Blossoms and Toad the Wet Sprocket. The tour, scheduled to begin on 3 June in St. Augustine, Florida and end on 23 July in Toronto, was delayed until 2021 and again until 2022 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The band launched the "Barenaked Bytes" mobile app in conjunction with the original tour announcement, allowing fans to gain access to ticket pre-sales, VIP packages, news, and discounts on merchandise.
Their 13th studio album, Detour de Force, was released on 16 July 2021. That September, Robertson said that Barenaked Ladies were working on a "secret project" with Rush bassist Geddy Lee.


== Musical style ==
Barenaked Ladies' music is primarily classified as alternative pop, influenced by folk and rock. The band, known for witty lyrics and catchy melodies, developed its comedy rock to suit audience demand in their early days of opening for college comedy troupes. The intellectual appeal of their lyrics has led to a label of geek rock by Eric Weisbard and others.
Ultimate Guitar senior editor David Slavković said the band's name "sounds like a random internet search of a random kid back in the early 2000s."


== Innovation and technology ==
Barenaked Ladies has often attempted to use new technology to promote themselves and their music. They were early adopters of computers for promotion when they released an "Interactive Press Kit" on a 3.5-inch floppy disk for Maybe You Should Drive in 1994, for which they received a MuchMusic Video Award. They used their website to allow fans to choose between two songs ("Be My Yoko Ono" and "Alternative Girlfriend") for inclusion on their greatest-hits CD Disc One; both were ultimately included.
The band participated in City Sonic, an interactive documentary series, in 2009. The series, with 20 Toronto artists, included Tyler Stewart reminiscing about the Ultrasound Showbar. The films were accompanied by an iPhone application which used Global Positioning System (GPS) technology to unlock more videos when the user was near a specific location.
In February 2013, Barenaked Ladies participated in the "first space-to-earth musical collaboration" by the band, Canadian astronaut and commander of the International Space Station Chris Hadfield, and Canadian student choir the Wexford Gleeks. The group, Hadfield, and the choir performed  "I.S.S. (Is Somebody Singing)", which was commissioned by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation and the Canadian Space Agency.


== Awards and nominations ==
In 1993, Barenaked Ladies were nominated for four Juno Awards: Canadian Entertainer of the Year, Album of the Year (for Gordon), Single of the Year (for "Enid"), and Group of the Year (their only win). They were nominated for Entertainer of the Year in 1994 and Group of the Year in 1995. Barenaked Ladies' first Grammy nomination came in 1999 for "One Week" in the Pop Performance by a Duo or Group category but lost to Brian Setzer's "Jump, Jive an' Wail". The song, and its album Stunt, brought the band three more Juno Awards that year, for Best Single, Best Pop Album, and Best Group. Robertson lost to Bryan Adams in the newly revived Best Songwriter Category. The video for "One Week" was nominated for an MTV Video Music Award for Best Art Direction, but lost to "Doo Wop (That Thing)" by Lauryn Hill.
The band was nominated for its second Grammy in 2001 for "Pinch Me" (again in the Pop Vocal Performance by a Duo or Group category), but lost to "Cousin Dupree" by Steely Dan. They won three Juno Awards for Maroon (Best Pop Album), Best Album, and Best Group, bringing their total to seven. "Pinch Me" was nominated for Best Single, but lost to "I'm Like a Bird" by Nelly Furtado. Page and Robertson were nominated in the Best Songwriter category for "Pinch Me", "Too Little Too Late", and "Falling for the First Time".
Five more Juno nominations followed, totalling 18 (in addition to the two songwriting nominations). In 2004, they were nominated for Pop Album of the Year (for Everything to Everyone) and Group of the Year. The following year, they were nominated for Music DVD of the Year for the documentary The Barenaked Truth. They were nominated for Group of the Year in 2006, and received a 2009 Juno for their children's album Snacktime!

Band members and other individuals have been nominated for four Junos for their work in connection with the band.


== Beyond music ==
Barenaked Ladies have an authorized biography published in 2001, Public Stunts Private Stories, written by friend and fellow Scarborough native Paul Myers with input from the band. In May 2006, the band and other prominent Canadian musicians formed the Canadian Music Creators Coalition in response to plans by the Canadian government to revisit and update copyright laws. Steven Page has acted as a conduit between the CMCC and the press, urging the government to focus on the Canadian cultural scene. Page has said that the CMCC was formed in response to what he believed was the wrong direction taken by the RIAA and major labels in suing fans for filesharing.
They are proponents of environmentalism, following Page's passion for greening; he is a board member of WWF Canada). The group began bringing an "eco-village" organized by the Reverb organization on their 2004 Au Naturale tour. They have partnered with Reverb to form the "Barenaked Planet" project, the group's name for their project to "green" their touring. Efforts include ensuring that backstage materials are recycled, using biodiesel in their tour vehicles (B20 in December 2006), and offsetting carbon emissions with wind power. This includes band-sponsored offsets for their emissions and volunteers selling "Barenaked Planet" stickers to concertgoers, with the proceeds offsetting emissions at venues.
Barenaked Ladies is the first Canadian band to receive its own ice-cream flavour, "If I Had 1,000,000 Flavours", following in the footsteps of other band-themed Ben & Jerry's flavours such as Cherry Garcia (Jerry Garcia), One Sweet Whirled and Magic Brownies (Dave Matthews Band) and Phish Food (Phish). The ice cream consisted of "chocolate and vanilla ice cream with chunks of chocolate-covered toffee, white chocolate, peanut butter cups and chocolate-covered almonds." Tyler Stewart described it as "an amalgamation of flavours [...] kind of like the band in a lot of ways—a lot of different personalities, different ethnic groups, all represented and rolled into one."
The band is a member of the Canadian charity Artists Against Racism, and has worked with them on awareness campaigns. They have appeared at WE Day events, encouraging young students to get involved in their communities and promote social activity through WE Charity's work.


== Side projects ==
Tyler Stewart, Jim Creeggan, Kevin Hearn, and Ed Robertson have had side projects during time off from Barenaked Ladies. Stewart was part of the short-lived Don't Talk Dance, which released a self-titled album in 1995 Chris Brown (who sat in for Hearn with Barenaked Ladies during his late-1990s cancer treatment). The album's profits went to Casey House, a Canadian AIDS charity. Stewart plays occasionally with the rockabilly band Pogo Rodeo, which he joined in high school. The band reunited in the early 2010s, and has played occasional concerts.
Jim Creeggan formed the alternative/jazz group the Brothers Creeggan, with brother and former Barenaked Ladies member Andy Creeggan and Ian McLauchlan (who died in 2009). The group, as a duo and a trio, recorded four albums between 1995 and 2002. It stopped performing regularly in the mid-2000s, and have only played together rarely (such as for Barenaked Ladies cruises). Andy Creeggan has several solo albums, with the most recent released in 2021.
Since 1995, Kevin Hearn has released four albums as the frontman of Kevin Hearn and Thin Buckle and three others solo (with members of Thin Buckle and other musicians). Hearn's albums are a mix of alternative rock and jazz, with other eclectic influences.


== Reception ==
In December 2008, Paul McCartney was reportedly asked by a session musician which bands he enjoyed in the current music scene. His response was "Barenaked Ladies": "Their harmonies are right on. They could outsing us any day of the week. I don't think John and myself ever had the sort of range they do." McCartney added that he would not mind recording with the band in the future. In 2018, Ontario musical historians Liam Coholan, Patrick Murphy, and Jon "The Don" Dilario said in Canadian Music History: "BNL was one of the most impactful bands when it comes to discussing the development of Canadian society in the 21st century."


== Band members ==


=== Current ===
Ed Robertson – lead and backing vocals, lead and rhythm guitars (1988–present)
Jim Creeggan – double bass, bass guitar, backing and lead vocals (1989–present)
Tyler Stewart – drums, percussion (1990–present), backing and lead vocals (2008–present)
Kevin Hearn – keyboards, lead and rhythm guitars, lead and backing vocals (1995–present)


=== Former ===
Steven Page – lead and backing vocals, rhythm and lead guitars (1988–2009; one-off in 2018)
Andy Creeggan – keyboards, backing and lead vocals (1991–1995), drums (1989–1990), percussion (1989–1990, 1991–1995)


==== Timeline ====


== Discography ==

Studio albums

Gordon (1992)
Maybe You Should Drive (1994)
Born on a Pirate Ship (1996)
Stunt (1998)
Maroon (2000)
Everything to Everyone (2003)
Barenaked Ladies Are Me (2006)
Barenaked Ladies Are Men (2007)
All in Good Time (2010)
Grinning Streak (2013)
Silverball (2015)
Fake Nudes (2017)
Detour de Force (2021)
In Flight (2023)


== Video releases ==
Barenaked in America
Too Little Too Late
Barelaked Nadies
The Barenaked Truth
Talk to the Hand: Live in Michigan


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Barenaked Ladies discography at Discogs
Barenaked Ladies at IMDb
Article at canadianbands.com
Barenaked Ladies' channel on YouTube