Juhani Komulainen (born 22 April 1953) is a Finnish composer of modern classical music. He lives in Helsinki.


== Biography ==
Juhani Komulainen was born in Jämsänkoski, and has studied composition at the University of Miami in the U.S., and with Einojuhani Rautavaara in Finland. He gained a reputation in the 1990s through his successful participation in several Finnish and international competitions.
The compositions of Juhani Komulainen are performed at international music festivals, choral competitions and workshops. He is working extensively with Finnish choirs and vocal groups creating a wide range of new choral compositions which have been recently premiered at concerts and recordings by numerous choirs including Academic Female Choir Lyran, The EOL Chamber Choir, Vocal Ensemble Fiori, Jubilate Chamber Choir, Kampin Laulu chamber choir, Vocal Ensemble Lumen Valo, Tapiola Choir and Liiton Miehet.


== Selected works ==
Choral Works: Mixed Choir

Salve, flos et decor (Tervehditty ollos, armoitettu)
Cat Morgan Introduces Himself. 1st prize in the South Coast Choral Society Composition Competition, California, U.S., 1986
Sade (Rain). Text by Leena Saarisalo ( in Finnish )
Three sonnets of Shakespeare
Four ballads of Shakespeare. 1st prize in the composition competition of the Helsinki Chapter of SULASOL, 1994
Herra, minun valoni (Lord, You are my light)
Satu (Saga)
Matka Eedeniin (Journey to Eden)
Fantaisies Decoratives I (Le Panneau - The Panel)
Fantaisies Decoratives II (Les Ballons - The Balloons)
Cycle sur St. Martin
Haltian herätys (Awakening of the elf)
Keltainen Nocturne (Yellow Nocturne)
Vaellus (Journey)
The Song of Solomon
Herra kanssas olkohon
Jesu Christe pie
Shall I compare thee...
Nyt ilovirttä veisaten (In dulci jubilo)
Nyt sieluni ylös (Siionin virsi)
Särkyköön mun sydämeni (Siionin virsi)
Choral Works: Treble Voices

Muurahaisten laulu (The Song of the Ants)
Sade (Rain). Text by Leena Saarisalo (in Finnish)
Antakaa lasten tulla (Let the children come). 1st prize in the 1992 Lohtaja Church Music Festival composition competition
Kuin sinapinsiemen. 1st prize in the 1992 Lohtaja Church Music Festival composition competition
Kudontalaulu (Knitting Song)
Polulla (On the trail)
Muisto (Memory)
Suvikuvia (Summer Scenes)
Shakesperean Settings
Syyskesän ilta (The late summer evening)
Vocalise
The Tide Rises, the Tide Falls
Kaksi yösonettia (Two Nocturnal Sonnets)
Call of the sea
Choral Works: Male Choir

Nouskaa te ruhtinaat
Metsä palaa (The forest is burning)
Metsässä (In the forest)
Three Landscapes of T. S. Eliot
most people
Hiljainen kumina syvällä ylläni
Works for Choir and Orchestra

Mysterium
Works for Soloist, Choir and Orchestra or Ensemble

Profeetan kutsuminen (Calling of a Prophet)
Sytytän kynttilän (Lighting a candle)
Works for String Orchestra

Bothnian Dance and Ballad
Electro-acoustic Works

Kalevala
Works for Solo Instrument

Ballade for piano
Aria magico
homage
Chamber Works

Impressioni
The Ides of March
Arrangements

Jesper Swedberg (1694): Lova Gud i himmelshöjd


== External links ==
Juhani Komulainen in Profile