The 2025 Panevėžys City mayoral election was held on 16 March 2025 and the second round was held on 30 March 2025, to elect the next mayor of panevėžys. After the previous mayor was involved in scandals that led to his removal from office, an emergency election will be held. The incumbent, Acting Mayor Petras Luomanas, did not run for re-election. There were six candidates on the ballot, awaiting the votes of the people of Panevėžys.
The winner of the election is Loreta Masiliūnienė, who secured a landslide victory with 72% of the votes.


== Overview ==
The mayor of Panevėžys is the elected head of the municipal government in Panevėžys, Lithuania's fifth-largest city. The mayor holds significant executive powers, overseeing the city's administration, managing public services, implementing decisions made by the Panevėžys City Council, and representing the city in both national and international affairs. The position is directly elected by the citizens of Panevėžys, with a term of four years and no limit on re-election. The mayor is responsible for shaping urban development, managing city resources, and enhancing the overall quality of life for residents.


== Electoral system ==
The mayor is elected in a simple majority vote if the voter turnout in the constituency is at least 40%. If the voter turnout is less than 40%, the candidate with the most votes (and at least 20% of the votes) is declared the winner. If there are more than two candidates and no candidate wins in the first round, a second round of voting is held within 15 days. The two leading candidates from the first round are eligible for the second round of voting. The candidate that gets more votes in the second round is declared the winner, regardless of voter turnout.


== First round ==
The first round of the election took place on 16 March 2025, featuring six candidates on the ballot. Since Loreta Masiliūnienė did not secure the required percentage to win outright, a second round will be held on 30 March 2025 with Gaižiūnas and Masiliūnienė being candidates.
Four candidates were eliminated: Saulius Raziūnas, Julius Limantas, Algimantas Kolpertas, and Solveiga Dagė.


== References ==