Bolsonarism (Portuguese: bolsonarismo) is an ideology or the political movement tied to Jair Bolsonaro. His views, policies, and supporters are variously described as fascist or far-right populism by scholars and newspaper outlets, despite Bolsonaro denying the fascist label. Bolsonarism broke out in Brazil with the rise in popularity of Jair Bolsonaro, especially during his campaign in the presidential election in Brazil in 2018, which elected him as president. The Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT) crisis during the Dilma Rousseff government, precipitated and accelerated by the political-economic crisis of 2014, strengthened Bolsonarist ideology and the Brazilian new right, which are part of the context of the rise of New Right populism at an international level.
In politics, figures from Bolsonarism, such as Eduardo Bolsonaro, have sought to attract punishments and international sanctions for Brazil in order to free Jair Bolsonaro from being legally judged according to Brazilian laws, which has triggered a US tariff on the country. Likewise, pro-Bolsonaro deputies, with the support of parties such as União Brasil, PP and Novo, tried to block, intimidate, destabilize and impede the functioning of the legal entities of the Legislature (Senate and Congress) as a form of blackmail for their objectives, such as making it difficult to vote on government projects that benefit workers (such as the exemption from Income Tax) and trying to free Jair Bolsonaro and those involved in the coup attempt and extremists from the January 8 attacks. Bolsonaro supporters have also repeatedly threatened to kill Brazilian authorities and politicians.


== Ideology ==
Bolsonarism was the predominant ideology of the Bolsonaro government and, according to its critics, is associated with rhetoric defending the family, patriotism, conservatism, religion and authoritarianism, neo-fascism, anti-communism, scientific denialism, carrying weapons, rejection of human rights and the aversion to the political left, as well as the cult of the figure of Bolsonaro, often called a "myth". Writer Olavo de Carvalho is often cited as having been the "guru" of the Bolsonarist ideology.
Although former president Bolsonaro defined his government as "free from ideological constraints", he did not recognize Bolsonarism as an ideology, his supporters — pejoratively called "Bolsominions" — diverge between those who agree with Bolsonaro and those who use the term to express their political position. 


== Attacks ==
Many of his supporters, in the name of Bolsonaro or based on his right-wing ideas, have carried out several riots and terrorist attacks such as 2023 Brazilian Congress attack and the 2024 Brasília attack against the election of the left-wing candidate for the presidency, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.


== See also ==
Brazilian integralism
Chavismo
Conservatism in Brazil
Diehard Duterte Supporters
Fascism in Brazil
Fujimorism
Kirchnerism
Lulism
Military dictatorship in Brazil
Trumpism


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Chaguri, Mariana Miggiolaro; do Amaral, Oswaldo E. (2023). "The Social Base of Bolsonarism: An Analysis of Authoritarianism in Politics". Latin American Perspectives. 50 (1): 32–46. doi:10.1177/0094582X231152245. ISSN 0094-582X.
Gonçalves, Leandro Pereira; Caldeira Neto, Odilon (2022). Fascism in Brazil: from integralism to Bolsonarism. Routledge studies in fascism and the far right. Abingdon, Oxon New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-032-12334-9.
Luz, Michele Diana da (2023-06-30). "Bolsonarism: What's in a Name?". Revista del CESLA: International Latin American Studies Review (31): 165–192. doi:10.36551/2081-1160.2023.31.165-192. Retrieved 2025-01-16.