Castle Town Dandelion (城下町のダンデライオン, Jōkamachi no Danderaion; "Dandelion of Jōkamachi"), is a Japanese four-panel comic strip manga series written and illustrated by Ayumu Kasuga. It made its first appearance in Houbunsha's Manga Time Kirara Miracle! magazine with the June 2012 issue. A 12-episode anime television series adaptation animated by Production IMS aired in Japan between July 2 and September 17, 2015.


== Plot ==
The Sakurada family live a normal life in a typical Japanese suburban household. At least that is what their father, who is the king, wants for them. As members of a royal family, each sibling possesses a unique superpower and over 2,000 security cameras have been placed around town to ensure that no harm befalls the siblings. In addition to that, each of the nine Sakurada siblings have been designated as a potential successor to become king or queen, and the only way to do that is through an election.
However, for the timid, soft-spoken and shy Akane Sakurada, who wields the power to control and manipulate gravity, all of this attention is nothing short of a nightmare. With all of the cameras constantly monitoring their activities and even broadcasting them on a television channel specially dedicated to the Sakurada family, she knows that if she becomes queen, then all of the cameras must disappear.


== Characters ==


=== Sakurada family ===
Akane Sakurada (櫻田 茜, Sakurada Akane)
Voiced by: Kana Hanazawa (Japanese); Bryn Apprill (English)
The main protagonist of the series. Akane is the fourth child and third daughter of the Sakurada family. She hates being the center of attention, due to a childhood trauma and being followed by cameras all day, and as such aims to be king to get rid of the cameras, despite how ironically she would get more attention on herself if she succeeds. She adores her family & friends and likes to rely on Shū. Her ability is Gravity Core, which allows her to manipulate the gravity of herself and anyone she touches, as well as allowing her to increase her speed and strength. Despite her shyness, she has a strong sense of justice and is her class' representative. She's completely unaware that she has a fan club at school. Once, Aoi and Kanade wanted her to become a more confident person so they give her an alter-ego as a superhero named Scarlett Bloom (スカーレットブルーム, Sukāretto Burūmu), basing her on a fictional television superhero, Rose Typhoon. Akane thinks this as a great disguise not knowing that the citizens and the Sakurada siblings were all aware of her true identity and only played along with the charade for her.
Aoi Sakurada (櫻田 葵, Sakurada Aoi)
Voiced by: Ai Kayano (Japanese); Tia Ballard (English)
Eldest daughter of the Sakurada family. Her ability is originally said to be Invisible Work, which allows her to do anything once she has learned it. However this is only a front for her true ability, Absolute Order, which allows her to order anyone under her bidding but she keeps this as a secret from everyone except her father, as she is afraid of this power and has very little control over it. It is also because of this that she feels she does not deserve to be queen, despite having the highest chance according to the pre-election rankings. In the manga her true ability is revealed as "Brave Believer", which is a power which gives people the push to lay their feelings bare and act on what they want to do but are hesitant to do so.
Shū Sakurada (櫻田 修, Sakurada Shū)
Voiced by: Ryōhei Kimura (Japanese); Ricco Fajardo, Terri Doty (young) (English)
Second child and eldest son of the Sakurada family. He is the twin of Kanade. His ability is Transporter, which allows him to teleport him and anyone he touches to a certain location. He has stated that he is too busy making sure Kanade is not chosen as king to be campaigning for and try to become king himself, despite knowing her agenda to become one. Although not really showing it, Shū has a crush on Hana from his childhood, which makes it a reason why he prefers girls with pigtails. In the past, Shū wanted to become a professional soccer player but Kanade accidentally injured his legs which resulted in his current condition preventing him from joining advanced sports. He is the second member of the Akane Fan Club which makes it easier for him to watch out for her. He greatly adores Kanade as well. He greatly resembles his father when his father was his age.
Kanade Sakurada (櫻田 奏, Sakurada Kanade)
Voiced by: Kaori Ishihara (Japanese); Michelle Rojas (English)
Third child and second daughter of the Sakurada family. She is the twin of Shū. Her ability is Heaven's Gate, which allows her to create objects using materials within a certain area. In order to materialize them, she has to pay the amount of money it takes to use the requested object, which forces her to hold down a job and keep a vast amount of money estimated to be as much as the country's national savings. She is the vice president of the Student Council. Among her siblings, Kanade has the strongest desire to become queen. Because she accidentally injured Shū's legs in the past, Kanade's motive for becoming the queen is to advance the country's medical system in order to cure him and correct her past mistake. She greatly adores Shū.
Misaki Sakurada (櫻田 岬, Sakurada Misaki)
Voiced by: Eriko Matsui (Japanese); Jad Saxton (English)
Fifth child and fourth daughter of the Sakurada family. She is the twin of Haruka. Her ability is All for One, which allows her to multiply herself up to seven times, which all represent aspects of her personality and the seven deadly sins: Yuniko (ユニコ) (wrath), Revi (レヴィ) (envy), Inari (イナリ) (greed), Bubu (ブブ) (gluttony), Bell (ベル) (sloth), Shaura (シャウラ) (lust), and Raio (ライオ) (pride). Since each copy excels in each of their aspects, Misaki gets annoyed that that makes her look bland in comparison as she doesn't excel in anything.
Haruka Sakurada (櫻田 遥, Sakurada Haruka)
Voiced by: Ayumu Murase (Japanese); Josh Grelle (English)
Sixth child and middle son of the Sakurada family. He is the twin of Misaki. His ability is Lots of Next, which allows him to calculate the possibilities of a situation effortlessly. He tends to be the straight man in the antics of his siblings. Haruka is one of two Sakuraba siblings (along with Aoi) who do not take interest in the election, as he wants to support Misaki.
Hikari Sakurada (櫻田 光, Sakurada Hikari)
Voiced by: Yui Ogura (Japanese); Sarah Wiedenheft (English)
10-year-old seventh child and fifth daughter of the Sakurada family. Her ability is God Hand, which allows her to increase or reverse the growth of a living being for 24 hours. Inspired by Sacchan's performance, Hikari tries to become an idol, under the name Light Sakuraba (桜庭 らいと, Sakuraba Raito), but finds it futile to draw votes for her since she isn't using her real name or age as an idol.
Teru Sakurada (櫻田 輝, Sakurada Teru)
Voiced by: Shiori Katsuta (Japanese); Jeannie Tirado (English)
Six-year-old eighth child and youngest son of the Sakurada family. His ability is Limit Over, which increases his strength to a superhuman level. He tends to speak in an old fashioned way and likes to think of himself as a hero.
Shiori Sakurada (櫻田 栞, Sakurada Shiori)
Voiced by: Aina Suzuki (Japanese); Kristin Sutton (English)
Five-year-old ninth child and youngest daughter of the Sakurada family. Her ability is Soulmate, which allows her to communicate with animals and even inanimate objects. Despite being the youngest of the nine, she's actually thoughtful and observant.
Borscht (ボルシチ, Borushichi)
Voiced by: Shō Hayami (Japanese); Christopher Sabat (English)
The Sakurada family's pet cat, it was first picked and adopted by Hikari. Borscht likes to chew plastic bags than cat food after claiming that even the taste of a royal cooking "loses" to a plastic bag. He also likes Akane and always sleeps on her chest as it feels like his old shelter, much to Hikari's dismay, since she thinks of herself as his true owner.
Sōichirō Sakurada (櫻田 総一郎, Sakurada Sōichirō)
Voiced by: Dai Matsumoto, Ryōhei Kimura (young) (Japanese); Phil Parsons, Ricco Fajardo (young) (English)
Sōichirō is the father of the nine Sakurada children and the king. He cares for his family so much that he secretly hires a SAT team whenever his children are alone at home. His parents died when he was younger, and as a result he became king in his first year of high school. His royal ability allows him to read people's emotions through their aura.
Satsuki Sakurada (櫻田 五月, Sakurada Satsuki)
Voiced by: Satsuki Yukino (Japanese); Stephanie Young (English)
Satsuki is the mother of the nine Sakurada children and the queen. Her original name is Satsuki Shinonome (東雲 五月, Shinonome Satsuki), and she is actually a year older than Sōichirō. She comes from a family of five siblings, and was Sōichirō's first friend as she was the only person willing to interact with him despite knowing his royalty.


=== Others ===
Hana Satō (佐藤 花, Satō Hana)
Voiced by: Yuka Aisaka (Japanese); Jill Harris (English)
Hana is Shū's classmate from elementary school who moved out from the town. After she returns, she falls in love with Shū and confesses her feelings. Though Shū has been in love with Hana since they were children, he decides to put their relationship on hold since he wants to focus on the election. Eventually, the two become lovers and Hana often helps Shū in his election campaign.
Karen Ayugase (鮎ケ瀬 花蓮, Ayugase Karen)
Voiced by: Saori Hayami (Japanese); Kristen McGuire (English)
Karen is Akane's classmate and childhood friend, always helping her whenever she is in trouble. She also has a crush on Akane.
Hajime Fukushina (福品 創, Fukushina Hajime)
Voiced by: Satoshi Nakao (Japanese); Anthony Bowling (English)
Fukushina is Akane's classmate and secretly the president of the Akane Fan Club. He likes Akane's face when she is embarrassed. Although his given name is unrevealed in the original manga, it is Hajime (創) in the anime.
An Shirogane (白銀 杏, Shirogane An)
Voiced by: Mao Ichimichi (Japanese); Brittany Lauda (English)
An is Akane's classmate. In the anime, she only made her appearance during the first and the last episodes and alongside Karen wishing their classmates to vote for Akane.
Sachiko Yonezawa (米澤 紗千子, Yonezawa Sachiko)
Voiced by: Sachika Misawa (Japanese); Alexis Tipton (English)
Nicknamed Sacchan (さっちゃん), she is an idol under the talent management Geinou Productions. Her career is the inspiration behind Hikari's alter ego as Light Sakuraba, much to her dismay. She initially sees Hikari/Light as a great rival and doesn't understand the true efforts as an idol, often giving her a bad treatment until she sprained her ankle during a live stage, causing her to realise her mistake. According to the manga's writer, Ayumu Kasuga, Sachiko was purposely designed and named after the voice actress herself.
Uzuki (卯月)
Voiced by: Kana Marutsuka (Japanese); Felecia Angelle (English)
Uzuki is one of Aoi's childhood friends, and the student council president of Sakuraka Academy.


== Media ==


=== Manga ===
Castle Town Dandelion is a four-panel comic strip manga written and illustrated by Ayumu Kasuga. It made its first appearance in the June 2012 issue of Houbunsha's Manga Time Kirara Miracle! magazine, and began serialization in the magazine with the August 2012 issue. Houbunsha published the first tankōbon volume on March 27, 2013, and seven volumes have been released as of November 27, 2023. A manga anthology illustrated by various artists titled Castle Town Dandelion Anthology Comic (城下町のダンデライオン アンソロジーコミック, Jōkamachi no Danderaion Ansorojī Komikku) was released on August 27, 2015.


=== Anime ===
The series was adapted into a 12-episode anime television series, directed by Noriaki Akitaya and animated at Production IMS. The series was written by Reiko Yoshida, and Shinpei Kobayashi served as character designer and animation director. The opening theme is "Ring Ring Rainbow!!" by YuiKaori (Yui Ogura and Kaori Ishihara), and the ending theme is "Honey♥Come!!" by Yui Ogura. The series premiered in Japan on July 2, 2015 on TBS and CBC, on Sun TV on July 3, and on BS-TBS on July 11. The series is licensed by Funimation (now known as Crunchyroll) in North America and is simulcast in its streaming service and in the United Kingdom and Ireland by Anime Limited and Viewster.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Anime official website (in Japanese)
Castle Town Dandelion (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia