The Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) is an international trade agreement between countries mostly located in Southeastern Europe. Founded by representatives of Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia, CEFTA over time expanded to Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia and Kosovo.


== Members ==
As of 2024, the parties of the CEFTA agreement are: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia.
Former parties are Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia. Their CEFTA memberships ended when they became member states of the European Union (EU).  Kosovo was originally represented by UNMIK, but began representing itself from October 2024 onwards.


== Membership criteria ==
Former Poznań Declaration criteria:

World Trade Organization membership
European Union Association Agreement with provisions for future full membership
Free Trade Agreements with the current CEFTA member states
Current criteria since Zagreb meeting in 2005:

WTO membership or commitment to respect all WTO regulations
any European Union Association Agreement
Free Trade Agreements with the current CEFTA member states


== Current members ==


== History ==
 


=== Original agreement ===
The original CEFTA agreement was signed by the Visegrád Group countries, that is by Poland, Hungary and Czechia and Slovakia (at the time parts of the Czechoslovakia) on 21 December 1992 in Kraków, Poland. It came into force in July 1994. Through CEFTA, participating countries hoped to mobilize efforts to integrate into Western European institutions and through this, to join European political, economic, security and legal systems, thereby consolidating democracy and free-market economics.
The agreement was amended by the agreements signed on 11 September 1995 in Brno and on 4 July 2003 in Bled.
Slovenia joined CEFTA in 1996, Romania in 1997, Bulgaria in 1999, Croatia in 2003 and Macedonia in 2006.


=== 2006 agreement ===
All of the parties of the original agreement had now joined the EU and thus left CEFTA. Therefore, it was decided to extend CEFTA to cover the rest of the Western Balkans, which already had completed a matrix of bilateral free trade agreements in the framework of the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe. On 6 April 2006, at the South East Europe Prime Ministers Summit in Bucharest, a joint declaration on expansion of CEFTA to Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Moldova, Serbia, Montenegro and UNMIK (on behalf of Kosovo) was adopted. Kosovo is directly represented in CEFTA since October 2024. Accession of Ukraine has also been discussed. The new enlarged agreement was initialled on 9 November 2006 in Brussels and was signed on 19 December 2006 at the South East European Prime Ministers Summit in Bucharest. The agreement came into effect on 26 July 2007 for Albania, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro and Macedonia, on 22 August for Croatia, on 24 October for Serbia, and on 22 November 2007 for Bosnia and Herzegovina. The aim of the agreement was to establish a free trade zone in the region by 31 December 2010.
CEFTA 2006 aims at expanding regional trade in goods and services, creating an attractive environment for investment, and contributing to economic development and cooperation within the Parties. Laying down on the principles of WTO rules and procedures and harmonising its policies with the EU legislation, CEFTA provides an effective instrument for the Parties to accelerate their European integration agenda. Since the establishing, CEFTA has been deepening the areas of cooperation based on the needs of the businesses and strengthening trading relations between the Parties. From achieving the full liberalisation of trade in goods and further liberalisation in trade in services, via reducing trade related costs, harmonising the policies within the Parties based on the EU legislation, to expediting trade between Parties through electronic exchange of information, CEFTA has proven as a framework that ensures transparent trade relations between the Parties that can enable the businesses to improve their capacities for different markets.


== Chair-in-office ==
The Chair-in-office rotates between member states:

2007 :  North Macedonia
2008 :  Moldova
2009 :  Montenegro
2010 :  Serbia
2011 :  UNMIK on behalf of Kosovo
2012 :  Albania
2013 :  Bosnia and Herzegovina
2014 :  North Macedonia
2015 :  Moldova
2016 :  Montenegro
2017 :  Serbia
2018 :  UNMIK on behalf of Kosovo
2019 :  Albania
2020 :  Bosnia and Herzegovina
2021 :  North Macedonia
2022 :  Moldova
2023 :  Montenegro
2024 :  Serbia
2025 :  Kosovo


== Relations with the European Union ==
All former participating countries had previously signed association agreements with the EU, so in fact CEFTA has served as a preparation for full European Union membership. Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, Slovenia joined the EU on 1 May 2004, with Bulgaria and Romania following suit on 1 January 2007. Croatia joined the EU on 1 July 2013.
Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, and North Macedonia have been undergoing EU accession talks since 2012, 2014 and 2022.


== See also ==
Economy of Europe
Free trade areas in Europe
European Free Trade Association (EFTA)
Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe (includes an array of bilateral FTAs)
South-East European Cooperation Process
Southeast Europe Transport Community
Rules of origin
Market access
Free-trade area
Tariffs


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

CEFTA official website
CEFTA Trade Portal
Original CEFTA Treaty
Market Access Map (A free tool developed by International Trade Centre, which identify customs tariffs, tariff rate quotas, trade remedies, regulatory requirements and preferential regimes applicable to products, including CEFTA)
Rules of Origin Facilitator (A free tool jointly developed by International Trade Centre, World Trade Organization and World Customs Organization which enables traders to find specific criteria and general origin requirements applicable to their products, understand and comply with them in order to be eligible for preferential tariffs. The tool is very useful for traders who want to gain benefit from CEFTA)
CEFTA 2006 Agreement