A congress is a formal meeting of the representatives of different countries, constituent states, organizations, trade unions, political parties, or other groups. The term originated in Late Middle English to denote an encounter (meeting of adversaries) during battle, from the Latin congressus.


== Political congresses ==


=== International relations ===
The following congresses were formal meetings of representatives of different nations:

The Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle (1668), which ended the War of Devolution
The Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle (1748), which ended the War of the Austrian Succession
The Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle (1818)
The Congress of Berlin (1878), which settled the Eastern Question after the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)
The Congress of Gniezno (1000)
The Congress of Laibach (1821)
The Congress of Panama, an 1826 meeting organized by Simón Bolívar
The Congress of Paris (1856), which ended the Crimean War
The Congress of Troppau (1820)
The Congress of Tucumán (1816)
The Congress of Utrecht (1712–1713)
The Congress of Verona (1822)
The Congress of Vienna (1814–15), which settled the shape of Europe after the Napoleonic Wars
The Congress of the Council of Europe.


=== Legislatures ===


==== Presidential and semi-presidential systems ====
In the mid-1770s, the British colonies that became the United States of America adopted for their joint  convention the word "Congress" - to emphasize each colony's status as a state in its own right. The term has been adopted by many  countries to refer to their legislatures.

The United States Congress is the bicameral legislative branch of the United States federal government.
The Continental Congress (1774–1781) was a convention of delegates from the Thirteen Colonies that became the Congress of the Confederation (1781–1789), legislature of the United States under the Articles of Confederation.
The Confederate States Congress of 1861–1865 operated in the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War.
The Congress of Guatemala (Spanish: Congreso de la República) is the unicameral legislature of Guatemala.
The National Congress of Honduras (Spanish: Congreso nacional) is the legislative branch of the government of Honduras.
The Congress of Mexico (Spanish: Congreso de la Unión) is the legislative branch of the Mexican government.
The Congress of Paraguay is the bicameral legislature of Paraguay.
The Congress of the Argentine Nation (Spanish: Congreso de la Nación Argentina) is the legislative branch of the government of Argentina.
The Congress of the Dominican Republic is the bicameral legislature of the Dominican Republic.
The Palau National Congress (Palauan: Olbiil era Kelulau) is the bicameral legislative branch of the Republic of Palau.
The Congress of the Federated States of Micronesia is the unicameral legislature of the Federated States of Micronesia.
The Congress of the Philippines (Filipino: Kongreso ng Pilipinas) is the legislative branch of the Philippine government.
The Congress of the Republic of Peru (Spanish: Congreso de la República) is the unicameral legislature of Peru.
The Congress of Colombia (Spanish: Congreso de la República) is the bicameral legislature of Colombia.
The National Congress of Bolivia was the national legislature of Bolivia before being replaced by the Plurinational Legislative Assembly.
The National Congress of Brazil (Portuguese: Congresso Nacional) is the bicameral legislature of Brazil.
The National Congress of Chile (Spanish: Congreso Nacional) is the legislative branch of the government of Chile.
The National Congress of Ecuador was the unicameral legislature of Ecuador before being replaced by the National Assembly.
France:
The Congress of the French Parliament refers specifically to when both houses of France's legislature sit together as a single body, usually at the Palace of Versailles, to vote on revisions to the Constitution, to listen to an address by the President of the French Republic, and, in the past, to elect the President of the Republic.
The Congress of New Caledonia is the national legislature under the semi-presidential system of the autonomous sui generis collectivity.


==== Non-presidential systems ====
Spanish Congress of Deputies (Spanish: Congreso de los Diputados) is the lower house of the Cortes Generales, Spain's legislative branch.
The National Congress of Belgium was a temporary legislative assembly in 1830, which created a constitution for the new state.
The legislature of the People's Republic of China is known in English as the National People's Congress.
The Congress of People's Deputies of the Soviet Union was the legislature and nominal supreme institution of state power in the Soviet Union.
Congress of People's Deputies of Russia was modeled after the Soviet Union's and existed in 1990–1993.
The Congress of Cuba was the bicameral legislature of Cuba from 1902 to 1959.


=== Parties ===
Many political parties have a party congress every few years to make decisions for the party and elect governing bodies, while others call it a party convention. Congress is included in the name of several political parties, especially those in former British colonies:

India
Indian National Congress
All India Trinamool Congress
Kerala Congress
Nationalist Congress Party
Tamil Maanila Congress
YSR Congress
Janta Congress Chhattisgarh
All India N.R. Congress
Canary Islands
National Congress of the Canaries
Eswatini
Ngwane National Liberatory Congress
Fiji
National Congress of Fiji
Guyana
People's National Congress
Lesotho
Basotho Congress Party
Lesotho Congress for Democracy
Lesotho People's Congress
Malawi
Malawi Congress Party
Malaysia
Malaysian Indian Congress
Namibia
Congress of Democrats
Nepal
Nepali Congress
Pakistan
Peoples Revolutionary Congress Pakistan
Pakistan Christian Congress
Sierra Leone
All People's Congress
South Africa
African National Congress
Congress of the People
Pan-Africanist Congress
Sri Lanka
All Ceylon Tamil Congress
Sri Lanka Muslim Congress
Sudan
National Congress (Sudan)
Trinidad and Tobago
United National Congress
Uganda
Ugandan People's Congress
Iraqi National Congress


=== Political organizations ===
National Congress of American Indians
Congress of Racial Equality
Continental Congress 2.0


== Labor congresses ==
Congress of Industrial Organizations
Trade Union Congress of the Philippines
Trades Union Congress
Canadian Labour Congress


== Religious Congresses ==
Catholic Congresses
Eucharistic Congresses
1947 Marian Congress
Subud Congress


== Non-political congresses ==
Congress is an alternative name for a large national or international academic conference. For instance, the World Congress on Men's Health is an annual meeting on men's medical issues.

Organizations in some athletic sports, such as bowling, have historically been named "congresses". The predecessors to the United States Bowling Congress (formed in 1995) were the American Bowling Congress (founded in 1895) and the Women's International Bowling Congress (founded in 1927).
A chess congress is a chess tournament, in one city, where a large number of contestants gather to play competitive chess over a limited period of time; typically one day to one week, or more.
ICCA Congress & Exhibition


== References ==


== External links ==

European affairs events
International congress calendar
Medical Congresses Around the World
Congress Youth Leader
Phillips, Walter Alison (1911). "Congress" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 6 (11th ed.). pp. 937–938.