Consensus democracy is the application of consensus decision-making and supermajority to the process of legislation in a democracy. It is characterized by a decision-making structure that involves and takes into account as broad a range of opinions as possible, as opposed to majoritarian democracy systems where minority opinions can potentially be ignored by vote-winning majorities. Constitutions typically require consensus or supermajority.
A consensus government is a national unity government with representation across the whole political spectrum. A concordance democracy is a type of consensus democracy where majority rule does not play a central role. Optional referendums and popular initiatives correspond to consensus democracy.


== Examples ==
 
Consensus democracy is most closely embodied in certain countries such as Switzerland, Germany, Austria, Denmark, Lebanon, Sweden, Iraq, and Belgium, where consensus is an important feature of political culture, particularly with a view to preventing the domination of one linguistic or cultural group in the political process. The term consociational state is used in political science to describe countries with such consensus based political systems. An example of such a system could be the Dutch Poldermodel.
Many parties in Lebanon call for applying consensus democracy, especially at times of crisis.
Tripartism applies consensus democracy to economic policy by fostering social dialogue between opposing interest groups, primarily national trade unions and employers' organizations.
Consensus government chiefly arises in non-partisan democracies and similar systems in which a majority of politicians are independent. Many former British territories with large indigenous populations use consensus government to fuse traditional tribal leadership with the Westminster system. Consensus government in Canada is used in the Northwest Territories and Nunavut, as well as the autonomous Nunatsiavut region, and similar systems have arisen in the Pacific island nations of Fiji, Tuvalu and Vanuatu, as well as the ancient Tynwald of the Isle of Man.


== Electoral systems ==
The Borda count tends to elect broadly-acceptable options or candidates (rather than consistently following the preferences of a majority).


== See also ==
Anticipatory democracy
Bioregional democracy
Coalition government
Consensus decision-making
Consociationalism
Types of democracy
Direct democracy
Grassroots democracy
Hung parliament
Jirga
List of politics-related topics
Minoritarianism
Open source governance


== References ==


== External links ==
Consensus Democracy: A New Approach to 21st Century Governance
Metagovernment - Project using the wiki consensus model as a replacement for current governments.
On Conflict and Consensus - A Handbook on Formal Consensus Decisionmaking.
Consensus voting, the Modified Borda Count (MBC)