The Coordination Council, originally known as the Coordination Council for ensuring the transfer of power (Belarusian: Каардынацыйная рада, romanized: Kaardynacyjnaja rada; Russian: Координационный совет, romanized: Koordinatsionnyy sovyet) is a non-governmental body created by presidential candidate Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya to facilitate a democratic transfer of power in Belarus. The council, founded during the 2020 Belarusian protests in response to the disputed 2020 Belarusian presidential election, originally had 64 core members (as of 13 February 2021) with a 7-member leadership presidium.
The first meeting of the Council took place on 18 August 2020. From late August to mid-October several of the presidium members were arrested or chose to exile themselves from Belarus, fearing repression by Belarusian security forces.
In 2022–2023, the Coordination Council was transformed into a more representative body for the Belarusian people, consisting of members from various democratic groups in exile. This marked a significant step in formalizing the opposition's leadership structure.
In May 2024, the Coordination Council held its first direct digital elections, where over 6,700 Belarusian citizens participated. It operates in exile due to the political situation in Belarus.
The European Parliament recognized the Coordination Council as a temporary representative body for the Belarusian people in its 2020 resolution 2020/2779(RSP), stating: "The European Parliament welcomes the Coordination Council as a temporary representative of the people demanding democratic change in Belarus and which is open to all political and social actors."


== Creation ==
The formation of the Coordination Council was announced on 14 August 2020, in a video released by Tsikhanouskaya. In the video, she also claimed that she had received between 60 and 70% of the vote in the 9 August presidential election, more than enough for an outright victory over longtime president Alexander Lukashenko. She appealed to the international community to recognise her as the winner. Tsikhanouskaya stated that the aims of the council is to coordinate a peaceful and orderly transfer of power from Lukashenko and to hold a new, free and fair presidential election at the earliest opportunity. On 17 August, Tsikhanouskaya released a video in which she stated that she was ready to lead a transitional government. On 18 August, the Council held its first press conference with questions being answered by Olga Kovalkova, Maxim Znak, Maria Kolesnikova, Pavel Latushko, and Sergey Dylevsky. On 19 August, the Council elected a 7-member Presidium. On 19 August, Tsikhanouskaya recorded an appeal to EU leaders not to recognise the presidential election results in a meeting of EU heads of government scheduled for later that day. On 19 August, Alexander Lukashenko described the Coordination Council members, stating, "Some of them were once in or close to power. They were kicked out and hold a grudge. Others are outright Nazis. Just take a look at their names." On the same day, former presidential contender Valery Tsepkalo said he did not understand the criteria for the new council's formation and its tasks. He complained that he was not invited. On 20 August, Prosecutor-General Alexander Konyuk initiated criminal proceedings against the Coordination Council members under Article 361 of the Belarusian Criminal Code. In a statement released, Konyuk alleged that the "creation and activity of the Coordination Council are aimed at seizure of state power, and at harming national security" and that "the creation of such bodies is not allowed in law, and they are unconstitutional." On the same day, presidium members Dylevsky and Znak were summoned for police questioning. Znak and Dylevsky arrived for questioning on the morning of 21 August and were later released.
On 21 August, Tsikhanouskaya's lawyer Znak filed a formal protest concerning the presidential election with the Supreme Court of Belarus. Znak said that "A complaint has been submitted. A decision on when to start proceedings is due within three days." On 24 August, presidium members Dylevsky and Kovalkova were detained by OMON officers whilst attempting to support a wildcat strike at the Minsk Tractor Works factory. Presidium members Vlasova, Latushko, Alexievich, and Kolesnikova were also summoned for questioning. Both Kovalkova and Dylevsky were sentenced to 10 days' imprisonment the following day.
On 26 August, Ivonka Survilla, President of the Rada of the Belarusian People's Republic, expressed her support for Tsikhanouskaya. On 31 August, presidium member Vlasova was detained by the OMON. On 5 September, presidium member Kovalkova chose to leave Belarus rather than remain in detention over the Section 361 charges. On 7 September, presidium member Kolesnikova was detained by unidentified masked men in Minsk.
On 9 September 2020, the only member of the presidium not yet arrested or missing was Nobel Prize in Literature laureate Svetlana Alexievich. However, there were reports from Belarusian journalists that unknown men were knocking at the doors of her home. As of 9 August 2020, she was under round-the-clock guard by diplomats for several European countries, including ambassadors from Poland and Lithuania.
In September 2020, Lithuania, where the council was based as of 2020, became the only sovereign state to recognize the CCTP as the sole legitimate government of Belarus.
At a press conference in Poland, council member Pavel Latushko condemned the situation in Belarus, claiming that 10,000 people were subject to misconduct and imprisonment orchestrated by the security forces. He stated that 450 people were tortured, and protesters were put into jail on fake charges. Latushko and Olga Kovalkova invited the OSCE and United Nations to send observers to Belarus to assess the situation.


== Сonvocations ==


=== First Сonvocation (2020–2022) ===

Initially, the Council included about 70 members.
The Council elected a 7-member presidium on 19 August 2020. The members of the presidium were:

Sviatlana Alexievich (Nobel Laureate in Literature)
Sergei Dylevsky, leader of Minsk Tractor Works (MTZ) strike committee)
Maria Kalesnikava, head of Viktar Babaryka's campaign
Olga Kovalkova, Belarusian Christian Democracy party co-chair and representative of Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya
Pavel Latushko, former Minister of Culture; Latushko announced that he had quit the council in late February 2023.
Liliya Vlasova (mediator and lawyer)
Maxim Znak, lawyer, member of Viktar Babaryka's headquarters
Three people were added to the presidium later:

Andrei Bastunets, journalist, chair of the Belarusian Association of Journalists
Ales Bialiatski, human rights defender, chair of the Viasna Human Rights Centre
Maksim Bogretsov, Vice President of EPAM Systems


==== Detentions and location ====


=== Second Сonvocation (2022–2024) ===

In August 2022, after the "Conference New Belarus" held in Vilnius, Tsikhanouskaya reformed the Coordination Council with the aim of making it a more representative body of Belarusians. By February 2023, the reform of the Coordination Council's composition was completed. The Council then consisted of 22 former members, 73 new delegates from civil society organizations, and 15 self-nominated members. This transformation was initiated to make the Council more representative of the Belarusian opposition forces in exile.


=== Third Сonvocation: First Coordination Council Election (2024–present) ===

In May 2024, a direct election was held for 80 seats on the Council. On 28 May 2024, the preliminary results of the elections to the Coordination Council's third composition were announced. The elections were held electronically from 25 to 27 May, verified through Belarusian passports. Altogether 6,723 voters participated in the election.
There were about 280 candidates, grouped in twelve electoral lists. The electoral lists had very similar goals to one another – restoring democracy and the rule of law in Belarus and preserving Belarusian independence, but differed regarding the relative priorities for "political, military, legal, international law, [or] economic means" of achieving the goals.
The numbers of seats allocated per list as a result of the May 2024 election were:

Latushko's Team and the Movement "For Freedom": 28 (35,07 %)
Prokopev-Yahorau Bloc: 13 (15,62 %)
Independent Belarusians: 8 (9,16 %)
European Choice: 8 (9 %)
Youth Offensive: 8 (8,89 %)
Our Cause/Belarusian Christian Democracy: 6 (7,27 %)
Volya Bloc: 6 (6,43 %)
Stop being afraid: 3 (3,36 %)
Vote of the Diaspora - Unity across Borders: 0 (2,74 %)
Solidarity: 0 (1,55 %)
Country for Life: 0 (0,91 %)
The Law and Order list of Aliaksandr Azarau was excluded prior to the vote for having violated the electoral rules. In the eleven non-excluded lists, there were 234 candidates.
Following the procedure defined in the statute of the Coordination Council, the delegates elected Anzhalika Melnikava, a member of Pavel Latushko's team, by a simple majority vote as Speaker of the council and Stanislava Hlinik, a team member of the Office of Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya as Vice-Speaker. Ivan Kravtsov, member of the Viktar Babaryka team was reelected for the third time as a Head of Secretariat.
The election organisers were criticised for providing too little information about the election in independent media and for providing information too late, just a few days before the election.


== Objectives and structure ==
In August 2020, Tsikhanouskaya stated that applications to the council were open to Belarusian citizens who recognised the officially declared election results to be falsified, and who were trusted by social groups. Applications were invited from individuals representing workers' groups, political parties, trade unions, and other organisations of civic society and from authoritative figures such as doctors, teachers, business leaders, authors, or sportspersons.


=== Objectives ===
The council stated that its primary goals are:

To end the political persecution of citizens and for those responsible to be brought to justice.
For the release of all political prisoners in Belarus.
The annulment of the 9 August presidential election and for new elections to be conducted to international standards organised by a reconstituted central elections commission.
Council Presidium member Pavel Latushko stated that the Council does not want to radically change the course of Belarusian foreign policy, adding that it wants to maintain "friendly and profound" relations with Russia, as well as to have a good working relationship with the European Union and to act as a bridge between the east and west.


=== Members ===
An initial membership list, consisting of 35 members, was circulated on 17 August 2020 and expanded to 51 members on 18 August. The council had 59 members in its core membership group on 29 August 2020, increasing to 64 members as of 13 February 2021. In addition to the 7-member presidium, other members, as of 13 February 2021, include athlete Nadzeya Astapchuk, film director Jury Chaščavacki, civic leader Ales Bialiatski, politician Jury Hubarewicz, physicist Alexander Dabravolski, politician Andrei Egorov, Mikalai Kazlov of the United Civic Party of Belarus, Andrei Kureichik, politician Vital Rymasheuski, painter Uladzimir Tsesler, former EPAM Systems top-manager Maksim Bahratsou, independent analyst Siarhei Chaly. On 24 August 2020, the council included an "expanded" support list of 600 members. After the first Coordination Council elections in 2024, the council had 80 members.


=== Working groups ===
As of 16 October 2020, the Coordination Council included working groups on several socio-political themes:

a trade union group ProfSoyuz Online for encouraging the creation of independent trade unions
a women's group
a support group for local initiatives in the districts of Belarus
KOTOC: legal advice for interactions with and electoral participation in sub-national formal structures (oblasts, raion)
an economic group
a business support group
Christian Vision
a political prisoners and human rights group
an education group
a group for the Belarusian language and culture.


==== Truth commission ====
In late November 2020, the Council published a draft document for debating the creation of a truth and reconciliation commission for the purposes of transitional justice. The commission, termed a "special agency", would "consider the use of physical force, special equipment and weapons against citizens in connection with political positions" or the violation or calls for the violation of citizens' rights by public officials. The agency would only consider individual responsibility; membership of an organisation would not be grounds for prosecution. In cases in which no physical harm was involved, the accused would go through a conciliation procedure. Other cases would be prosecuted under administrative, "disciplinary," or criminal law. The showing of "effective remorse" or the lack of it would weaken or strengthen some of the financial and property penalties in the proposed legal definition of the agency's powers.


=== Factions ===

The primary and fundamental form of interaction among the delegates of the Coordination Council is through factions. To enhance the efficiency of the Council's work, formalized interactions between groups of delegates can also take place through working groups and committees. A faction is a group of delegates who have come together to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Coordination Council in achieving its goals. The initial names, numbers, and composition of the factions correspond to the names, numbers, and composition of the electoral lists that secured seats in the Coordination Council. Delegates are free to move from one faction to another, leave a faction, or not belong to any faction. A faction may also be dissolved by a majority decision of its members. The creation of new factions or the re-establishment of dissolved factions is not permitted. A faction's name may be changed by a majority vote of its members, but no more than once every six months.


=== Representatives ===

On 31 August 2021 the Coordination Council presented a structure update that implies the election of representatives in key areas of development.
Representatives of the Coordination Council should act as a liaison between international partners and national actors in certain areas, help establish professional ties, prepare analytical notes on the situation in their field, promote topics among international structures, participate in expert discussions, jointly develop support plans for certain sectors. Representatives are elected positions with a 6-month mandate. The candidates publicly present the program, which should be implemented in the next six months.

Business and innovation economy - Tatsiana Marynich
Eastern Partnership - Valery Matskevich
Civil Society - Andrey Egorov
Culture - Andrei Kureichik
Political prisoners - Tatsiana Khomich (Maria Kalesnikava's sister)
Human Capital Development - Olga Kovalkova
Digital transformation - Alex Shkor
Jurisprudence - Mikhail Kirilyuk
Sports - Nadzeya Astapchuk


== "Extremist group" status ==
In January 2023, the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Belarus recognized the Coordination Council as an extremist organization. According to Belarusian legislation, members of extremist groups face imprisonment. Earlier, in 2021–2022, Belarusian courts recognized the Council's internet resources as extremist materials. 
In November 2023, more than 130 searches were conducted, and more than 145 properties were arrested during a massive raid conducted by the Belarusian criminal police against the members of the Coordination Council and their relatives. According to Belarusian human rights activists, people allegedly associated with the Constitutional Court are approached with search warrants under six articles of the Criminal Code of the Republic of Belarus:

"Treason to the state" – up to 15 years in prison;
"Conspiracy or other actions committed to seize state power" – up to and including the death penalty;
"Calls for actions aimed at harming the national security of the Republic of Belarus" - up to three years of imprisonment;
"Creation of an extremist formation" – up to seven years;
"Financing extremist activities" – up to six years in prison;
"Promoting extremist activity" – up to six years.
On 23 January 2024, the Belarusian Investigative Committee announced that charges where brought against the Secretary of the Coordination Council Ivan Kravtsov, who has been accused of conspiracy or other actions committed to seize government power, сreation of an extremist formation and other articles of the criminal code. Kravtsov has been the secretary of the Coordination Council since its formation in 2020.


== Relations with other opposition group structures ==
In late October 2020, the Pavel Latushko, a presidium member, created National Anti-crisis Management (NAM), that at the time was seen as a shadow government, to manage the detailed administration tasks of a peaceful transfer of power leading to the inauguration of a newly elected president. NAM published internal reports of the Belarusian Ministry of Internal Affairs, according to which 25,800 people had been detained between 9 August and 9 November 2020, and 4000 complaints of torture and other illegal actions had been lodged with the ministry and ignored.
In August 2024, the Coordination Council, the United Transitional Cabinet, Tsikhanouskaya and her administrative Office published an agreement describing principles of their respective roles, power relations, and dispute resolution procedures. Article 4.2 of the agreement states that the Coordination Council is elected democratically using proportional representation at least once every two years.


== International relations ==
Tsikhanouskaya asked the international community to support the efforts of the Coordination Council.


=== Organisations ===
 Tsikhanouskaya was invited to 1st meeting of the Council of Europe Contact Group on Belarus on 8 November 2022, where Secretary-General Marija Pejčinović Burić stated that "The Council of Europe stands on principle with Belarus' democratic forces and civil society". Tsikhanouskaya Participated in a debate on Belarus during a plenary meeting of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in January 2024.
 Tsikhanouskaya was invited to the 3rd summit of the European Political Community in Granada, Spain on 5 October 2023 where she met the leaders of Armenia the Czech Republic, Latvia and Spain, and representatives of the European Union. She was again invited to the 4th European Political Community Summit on 18 July 2024 in the United Kingdom by British prime minister Keir Starmer.
 Josep Borrell, the European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, called for the authorities in Belarus to stop criminal proceedings against members of the Coordination Council. The European Parliament recognised the Coordination Council as the "interim representation of the people demanding democratic change in Belarus" and stated that it would not recognise Alexander Lukashenko as president of Belarus after the expiry of his term on 5 November 2020. Tsikhanouskaya addressed the Foreign Affairs Committee of the European Parliament on 13 October 2022. On 24 November 2022, the European Parliament passed a resolution welcoming the formation of the United Transitional Cabinet. Tsikhanouskaya participated in the 11th session of the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly in March 2024 in Brussels.
 Tsikhanouskaya participated in the 29th OSCE Ministerial Council in Łódź, Poland in December 2022  and spoke at the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly on 24 February 2023 in Vienna, Austria.
 Tsikhanouskaya attended the 59th meeting of the Munich Security Conference in February 2023 where she held meetings with the President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz and former speaker of the US House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi.
 Tsikhanouskaya attended the United Nations General Assembly in September 2022.
 Tsikhanouskaya attended the annual summit of the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland in January 2023. At the summit, Tsikhanouskaya held bilateral meetings with the leaders from Ireland, Switzerland, Belgium, Moldova, Luxembourg and Spain. She also held meetings with representatives from the European Commission, the International Labour Organization, the European Investment Bank, and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.


=== States ===

 Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau met  Tsikhanouskaya in Ottawa 23 November 2022 and reaffirmed Canada's support for the democratic aspirations of the Belarusian people.
 Estonian Foreign Minister Urmas Reinsalu announced on 18 August 2020 that Estonia does not recognize the results of the 2020 election. On 24 October 2022, Tsikhanouskaya met with Reinsalu in Tallinn, and he announced plans to appoint an "ambassador at large" to the Belarusian opposition. Tsikhanouskaya also met with President of Estonia Alar Karis and addressed the Riigikogu. Foreign Minister Urmas Reinsalu met Tsikhanouskaya in Tallinn on 24 October 2022 and expressed support for the democratic aspirations of the Belarusian people.
 Tsikhanouskaya visited Croatia in January 2023 and held meetings with prime minister Andrej Plenković and foreign minister Gordan Grlić-Radman.
 Tsikhanouskaya visited Helsinki in December 2022 where she met with Finnish President Sauli Niinistö and Prime Minister Sanna Marin.
 Lithuanian President Gitanas Nausėda spoke with Tsikhanouskaya by telephone, offering his support for the Coordination Council. The Prime Minister of Lithuania called on Belarus to conduct new, "free and fair" elections supervised by international monitors. Lithuanian Foreign Minister Linas Linkevičius referred to Lukashenko as the "former president" of Belarus. On 20 August, Lithuanian prime minister Saulius Skvernelis invited Sviatlana to his office and publicly referred to her as "the national leader of Belarus. On 10 September 2020, a law was passed by the Lithuanian Parliament which recognises Tsikhanouskaya as the "elected leader of the people of Belarus" and the Coordination Council as the "only legitimate representatives of the Belarusian people". The resolution also declares that Lukashenko is an "illegitimate leader".
 Polish Prime Minister, Mateusz Morawiecki, referred to the Coordination Council as the right partner for the authorities to negotiate with. On 3 October 2022, the Polish Minister of Interior and Administration Mariusz Kamiński met with Tsikhanouskaya and four other members of the United Transitional Cabinet. Tsikhanouskaya met with Polish President Andrzej Duda in Warsaw on 8 December 2022.
 On 25 August, a spokesperson for Russian President Vladimir Putin welcomed that the leadership of the Coordination Council did not want to reduce ties with Russia and instead hoped to continue with good bilateral relationships between the two countries. On March 9, 2021, Russian Ambassador to Belarus Dmitry Mezentsev said in an interview to the RBK TV channel that the Coordinating Council asked him for a personal meeting, but the diplomat refused. "These are people no one has ever elected, these are people who are not vested with the trust of millions of voters. These are people who have defined themselves as such. This is such one of the public associations, maybe the same as a society of book lovers, philatelists, numismatists, fans of this or that club. But then they should be engaged in the public field of club work, and not engaged in the overthrow of the government".
 The US Secretary of State in a statement urged the Belarusian government to actively engage Belarusian society, including through the newly established Coordination Council, in a way that reflects what the Belarusian people are demanding, for the sake of the future of Belarus, and for a successful Belarus. The United States Government stated that "the people have clearly rejected the regime".


=== Citizens' protest groups ===
On 1 November 2020, in the context of the October 2020 Polish protests, Polish citizens led by All-Poland Women's Strike created a Consultative Council that they said was inspired by the Belarusian Coordination Council.


== See also ==
Belarusian democracy movement
Belarusian partisan movement (2020–present)
New Belarus passport project
United Transitional Cabinet of Belarus
Rada of the Belarusian Democratic Republic


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Профсоюз онлайн - проект для вступления в независимые профсоюзы trade union working group
Инициатива КОТОС: Коллегиальные органы территориального общественного самоуправления local government election/legal interaction working group
Фемгруппа КС women's working group on Telegram