The Foundation for Defense of Democracies (FDD) is a neoconservative 501(c)(3) non-profit think tank based in Washington, D.C., United States. It has been described as a pro-Israel, anti-Iran lobby group due to its focus on Iran and opposition to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
FDD publishes research on foreign policy and security issues, focusing on subjects such as nuclear-non proliferation, cyber threats, sanctions, illicit finance, and policy surrounding China, Iran, Israel, North Korea, Russia, Turkey, and the war in Afghanistan.
In September 2019, FDD executives formed the 501(c)(4) organization FDD Action, which officially registered as a lobby under the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 on 15 November 2019. 


== History and mission ==
FDD was founded in 2001 as "Emet"—Hebrew for "Truth". In the initial documents filed for tax-exempt status with the Internal Revenue Service, FDD's stated mission was to "provide education to enhance Israel's image in North America and the public's understanding of issues affecting Israeli-Arab relations". Its mission broadened after the September 11 attacks in 2001. Later documents described its mission as "to conduct research and provide education on international terrorism and related issues".
On its website, FDD describes itself as "a nonpartisan 501(c)(3) research institute focusing on national security and foreign policy" that "conducts in-depth research, produces accurate and timely analyses, identifies illicit activities, and provides policy options – all with the aim of strengthening U.S. national security and reducing or eliminating threats posed by adversaries and enemies of the United States and other free nations."
John Mearsheimer in 2007, Muhammad Idrees Ahmad in 2014, and Ofira Sekiktar in 2018 have described FDD as part of the Israel lobby in the United States. Sima Vaknin-Gil, director general of Israel's Ministry of Strategic Affairs, had stated that the FDD works in conjunction with the Israeli government including the ministry.
FDD opposed the nuclear agreement with Iran during the Barack Obama administration. It advised the first Donald Trump administration on ways to subvert Iran. Iran announced sanctions against FDD and its CEO in 2019. According to a 2019 article in The Atlantic, "no place else has made an institutional specialty of recommending hard-line Iran policies and offering detailed proposals for how to implement them the way the FDD has done".


== Activities ==


=== Center on Cyber and Technology Innovation ===
The Center on Cyber and Technology Innovation (CCTI) conducts research and analysis to address cybersecurity threats to U.S. government, private sector, and allied nations while supporting technology innovation. The center analyzes adversaries' strategies and develops technological, governance, and policy responses. CCTI houses CSC 2.0, the successor organization to the Cyberspace Solarium Commission.


=== China Program ===
The FDD's China Program is a research initiative focused on analyzing and responding to the economic, technological, and security-related activities of the Chinese Communist Party and the potential threat they pose to US national security. The program draws on expertise across economic, military, technological, cyber, and political domains. The China Program is chaired by Matt Pottinger, who served as the Deputy National Security Advisor from 2019 to 2021.
In June 2023, a delegation from FDD joined by Israeli experts visited Taiwan and met with President Tsai Ing-wen. The delegation discussed mutual threats and asymmetric warfare strategies. In 2024, members of the China Program held a tabletop exercise in Taipei to examine China's economic and cyber-coercion against Taiwan.


=== The Iran Project ===
FDD's Iran Program is led by CEO Mark Dubowitz. Dubowitz and the FDD have been sanctioned by Iran for advocating sanctions against Iran and working to end the Iranian nuclear deal.
In 2008, FDD founded the Iran Energy Project which "conducts extensive research on ways to deny the Iranian regime the profits of its energy sector". The Wall Street Journal credited FDD with bringing "the idea of gasoline sanctions to political attention."


=== The Syria Project ===
For years, Syria has been a focus of FDD's research because of its alignment with Iran and support for organizations such as Hezbollah. In 2012, as the Arab Spring spread to Syria, FDD launched "The Syria Project" to support "secular, liberal elements within the Syrian opposition and dissident communities" and "to analyze the changing situation and operational environment, and to identify the optimum policy options." In that effort, FDD facilitated a Skype call between dissidents and U.S. journalists in 2012.


=== Turkey Program ===
The FDD's Turkey Program is a research initiative, that conducts research on Turkey's domestic politics, foreign policy, and their implications for US national security – with particular attention to developments under the Justice and Development Party (AKP). The program examines areas including democratic governance, minority rights, religious freedom, sanctions enforcement and illicit finance.


=== Long War Journal ===
The Long War Journal is an FDD project dedicated to reporting the "war on terrorism" launched by the United States and its allies following the September 11 terrorist attacks in 2001. Under the direction of FDD senior fellows Bill Roggio and Thomas Joscelyn, this website covers stories about countries such as Afghanistan, Pakistan, Somalia, Syria, and Iraq and follows the actions of al Qaeda and its affiliates. According to the Columbia Journalism Review, "Roggio's greatest service, then, may be the way he picks up where the mainstream press leaves off, giving readers a simultaneously more specific and holistic understanding of the battlefield", but "...there have been times when Roggio has done himself a disservice by aligning with bloggers who are more about pushing a conservative agenda."
When it was announced in October 2021 that President Joe Biden's top diplomat for Afghanistan, Zalmay Khalilzad, was stepping down, Bill Roggio of the FDD said, "It is about time he stopped stealing money from the US government. He shoulders a large amount of the blame for shilling for the Taliban."


== Funding ==


=== 2001–2004 ===

In 2011, news website ThinkProgress published FDD's Form 990 documents that revealed the source of FDD's funds between 2001 and 2004. Top donors included:

Roland Arnall: $1,802,000
Edgar M. and Charles Bronfman: $1,050,000
Michael Steinhardt: $850,000
Abramson Family Foundation (of Leonard Abramson): $822,523
Bernard Marcus: $600,000
Lewis Ranieri: $350,000
Other notable donors:

Haim Saban
Jennifer Laszlo Mizrahi
Douglas J. Feith


=== 2008–2011 ===
FDD's Schedule A documents filed by the end of the 2011 tax year, indicates that the organization from 2008 to 2011 received more than $20,000,000 in contributions and the top three donors were:

Bernard Marcus: $10,745,000
Paul Singer: $3,600,000
Sheldon Adelson: $1,510,059


=== 2017 ===
In 2018, the Associated Press reported that the United Arab Emirates had wired $2.5 million to the FDD through a company in Canada and George Nader to host a conference amidst Qatar diplomatic crisis about the country's role as a state-sponsor of terrorism. FDD stated that it does not accept money from foreign governments, adding that "[a]s is our funding policy, we asked if his funding was connected to any foreign governments or if he had business contracts in the Gulf. He assured us that he did not".
Adam Hanieh states that the FDD high-profile conference of May 23, 2017, was in line with UAE's policy at the time, which officially alleged that Qatar finances Islamist groups, adding that emails leaked shortly after show that UAE's Ambassador Yousef Al Otaiba had a "cosy relationship" with the FDD, and had reviewed the remarks made by Robert Gates at the convention. The leaked emails revealed a extent of a backchannel cooperation built between FDD and the UAE. Qatar appeared to be in compliance with the terms of the agreement for countering terrorism and not supporting extremists from its territory according to the report published by The Washington Post in February 2021. According to documents obtained by Al Arabiya published on July 10, 2017, Qatar had agreed to stop providing support to the Muslim Brotherhood, expelled non-citizen Brothers from Qatar, and would not shelter any persons from GCC countries to avoid undermining relations with the Persian Gulf.


=== Others ===
Additionally, as of 2016, FDD had received donations from the following institutions:


== Personnel ==


=== Executives ===
Clifford May, founder and president
Mark Dubowitz, CEO
Bill McCarthy, COO
Jonathan Schanzer, executive director


=== Fellows ===

Jonathan Conricus
Amir Eshel
Bonnie Glick
Olli Heinonen
Orde Kittrie
Michael Ledeen
Emanuele Ottolenghi
Cleo Paskal
Walid Phares


== Reception ==
The American political blog ThinkProgress criticized FDD for what it called "alarmist rhetoric and fear mongering", for example in April 2002 when they aired a 30-second television ad campaign called "Suicide Strategy" that was described by some critics as "conflating" Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) leader Yasser Arafat with the likes of Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein. As FDD explained it: "a militant Islamic terrorist who 'martyrs' himself by hijacking a plane and flying it into the World Trade Center"—referring to the September 11 attacks—"is no different from a militant Islamic terrorist who 'martyrs' himself by strapping explosives to his body and walking into a hotel"—i.e., Palestinian suicide attacks.
In 2017, journalist Bari Weiss of The New York Times reported on dissent within the organization over the pro-Trump orientation it adopted following the 2016 elections, which included at least two employees leaving.
In 2018, Lawrence Wilkerson, said the FDD was "pushing falsehood" in support of waging wars. In 2019, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Islamic Republic of Iran designated the Foundation for Defense of Democracies a terrorist organization. Farid Hafez, researcher at Universität Salzburg, wrote in 2019 that FDD was one of the key organizations peddling Islamophobia in a transatlantic network.
The International Relations Center features a report on the foundation on its "Right Web" website, a program of the think tank Institute for Policy Studies which, according to its mission statement, seeks to "check the militaristic drift of the country". The report states that "although the FDD is an ardent critic of terrorism, it has not criticized actions taken by Israel against Palestinians that arguably fall into this category".
In 2023, The Intercept and LA Weekly alleged that FDD, along with other US-based think tanks, were coordinating a pressure campaign against the regional rivals of the UAE, including Iran, Qatar, and Turkey.
Christopher A. Bail, professor of sociology, public policy and data science at Duke University, describes FDD as an "anti-Muslim fringe organization" that has tried to establish itself as a legitimate authority on Islam and terrorism by tactically using "ethnic experts" —i.e. pundits with Middle Eastern background who were not Muslim— because they advocate views contrary to the mainstream perspective of the Muslim community in the United States, but look like and talk like Muslims. Sarah Marusek, research fellow at University of Johannesburg, argues that FDD is one of the "key organizations peddling Islamophobia" in a "transatlantic network". Farid Hafez, researcher at Universität Salzburg, says the same.


== See also ==
European Foundation for Democracy#Ties to the Foundation for Defense of Democracies


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
"Foundation for Defense of Democracies". Internal Revenue Service filings. ProPublica Nonprofit Explorer.