The Government of Western Australia, also known as the WA Government, is the executive branch of government for the Australian state of Western Australia. It comprises the State Cabinet, Executive Council and the public sector. The WA Government includes approximately 130 agencies and authorities delivering frontline and support services, employs approximately 240,000 people and had an expected operating expenditure of A$43.59 billion in the 2024–25 financial year.
The state's founding constitution was enacted in 1890, with the state being a democratic constitutional monarchy. Since federation in 1901, Western Australia has been a constituent state of the Commonwealth of Australia, and the Commonwealth Constitution regulates its relationship with the Australian Government. The legislative branch takes the form of the bicameral Parliament of Western Australia, comprising the Legislative Assembly (lower house), Legislative Council (upper house), and the monarch of Australia represented through the Governor. The judicial branch comprises the Supreme Court of Western Australia and the lower courts.


== History ==


== Executive and judicial powers ==
Western Australia is governed according to the principles of the Westminster system, a form of parliamentary government based on the model of the United Kingdom. Legislative power rests with the Parliament of Western Australia, which consists of King Charles III, represented by the Governor of Western Australia, and the two Houses, the Western Australian Legislative Council (the upper house) and the Western Australian Legislative Assembly (the lower house). Executive power rests formally with the Executive Council, which consists of all ministers and is presided over by the governor.
The Governor, as representative of the Crown, is the formal repository of power, which is exercised by him or her on the advice of the Premier of Western Australia and the Cabinet. The Premier and Ministers are appointed by the Governor, and hold office by virtue of their ability to command the support of a majority of members of the Legislative Assembly. Judicial power is exercised by the Supreme Court of Western Australia and a system of subordinate courts, but the High Court of Australia and other federal courts have overriding jurisdiction on matters which fall under the ambit of the Australian Constitution.


== Ministries ==

As of 18 March 2025, the following individuals serve as government ministers, at the pleasure of the King, represented by the Governor of Western Australia. All ministers and are members of the Parliament of Western Australia.


== Current composition ==


== See also ==

List of Western Australian government agencies


== References ==


== External links ==
Government of Western Australia website
Constitution ACT 1889 (WA)
The Parliament of Western Australia website
The Premier of Western Australia website