The Military Council for Justice and Democracy (Arabic: المجلس العسكري للعدالة والديمقراطية; French: Conseil Militaire pour la Justice et la Démocratie, CMJD) was a supreme political body of Mauritania. It served as the country's interim government following the coup d'état which ousted the President Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya on August 3, 2005. It was led by the former Director of the national police force, Colonel Ely Ould Mohamed Vall. After seizing power, it quickly pledged to hold elections within two years and promised that none of its own members would run. 
A few days after seizing power, Ely Ould Mohamed Vall named Sidi Mohamed Ould Boubacar as Prime Minister following the resignation of Maaouya Ould Sid'Ahmed Taya's last Prime Minister, Sghair Ould M'Bareck. 
A presidential election took place in March 2007 and the new President Sidi Ould Cheikh Abdallahi was sworn in on April 19, 2007. 
Several members of CMJD later became members of the next Mauritanian military junta, the High Council of State when it came to power in the 2008 Mauritanian coup d'état under the leadership of general Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz.


== Members ==


== See also ==
Military Committee for National Recovery (CMRN) – Military Government in 1978–1979.
Military Committee for National Salvation (CMSN) – Military Government in 1979–1992.
High Council of State (HCE) – Military government in 2008–2009.


== References ==


== External links ==
Mauritania army says to rule country for 2 years – Reuters
Oil wealth triggers army coup – Times Online.
Mauritanian Military and Security Forces Overthrow Pro-Israel President, Ma'aouya Taya – Al Jazeera
Mauritania seize of power 'not a surprise' and Jubilant Mauritanians celebrate end of Taya's rule – SABC
US Envoy Meets Leaders of Mauritanian Junta and Mauritania Remains Calm After Military Coup – Voice of America
Mauritanian coup leaders dissolve National Assembly and Int'l community intensifies pressure on Mauritanian coup leaders – Xinhua
Govt continues despite coup and Coup leaders assure diplomats – News24.com
Thousands Back Junta in Mauritania – The Guardian
African Union boycotts Mauritania after coup – The Globe and Mail