Ateme S.A. is a multinational company that specializes in video compression, CDN/streaming, cloud recording and advertising. It develops software for video compression based on the main standards: MPEG2, H.264/AVC, H.265/HEVC, AV1 and H.266/VVC (Versatile Video Coding). Ateme solutions also feature packaging capabilities with MPEG2-TS, HLS and DASH output. These solutions are used by content providers, broadcasters, multichannel video programming distributors, and streaming providers for delivery over cable, satellite, IPTV, terrestrial, and OTT networks.
The company has its headquarters in Vélizy near Paris, France, with offices that spread over Europe, North America, South America, Asia and Australia. The company also has a worldwide resellers network and operates globally with clients in more than 60 countries.
The company is a member of broadcasting associations such as DVB, SMPTE, NAB, SVG, VIDTRANS, iabm, ABU, WTA, SSPI. Ateme maintains a global presence through content providers, service providers, broadcasters and video platforms. Ateme exhibits at global trade shows such as the IBC and NAB Show.


== Products ==
TITAN: Software suite for origination, acquisition and compression.
KYRION: High-quality/ultra-low-latency encoding/decoding appliance.
NEA: Software suite for origin, packaging, storage, analytics and CDN.
PILOT: Software suite for management, operations and deployment.
Ateme +: Cloud-based SaaS video compression, processing.
Ateme portfolio runs on any type of infrastructure: bare metal appliance, private datacenter or off-premises hyperscalers including AWS, GCP, Azure or Akamai.


== Market ==
Ateme has been listed on the Paris Euronext market since 2014 and in November 2020 it acquired Anevia, a provider of OTT and IPTV software solutions. In 2023, Ateme served over a thousand customers worldwide, earning €100 million in revenues, of which more than 90% outside its home market.
Ateme's customers include various global broadcast and OTT companies, such as EBU, Proximus, Telefónica, NBC Sports, Encompass, Globo, Sky, Orange, TV Azteca, RTL Group, TotalPlay, FOX Sports, AMC Networks, CRA, France Télévisions, FPT Telecom, Esporte Interativo, and Globecast.


== Awards ==
Ateme won the 2022 Technology and Engineering Emmy Awards  by The National Academy of Television Arts & Sciences (NATAS), in 3 categories: Development of Perceptual Metrics for Video Encoding Optimization, Artificial Intelligence Optimization for Video Compression, Development of Massive Processing Optimized Compression Technologies.


== Projects ==
TITAN Edge Project, supported by the Ile-de-France regional council and the European Union, aims to develop a new-generation, innovative video distribution platform to solve the regionalization problem.
3EMS(Energy Efficient Enhanced Media Streaming) Project, funded by the Brittany Region, co-financed by the European Regional Development Fund, aims to deploy the first end-to-end 5G VVC chain to achieve the goals of reducing video traffic and energy consumption while also limiting network congestion.
3EMS-2 Project, financed by the FEDER, the Brittany Region and Rennes Métropole, aims to reduce the energy impact of video services and support the energy transition.
NESTED (New vidEo STandards for Enhanced Delivery) Project, co-financed by the Brittany Region and Rennes Métropole, focuses on the development of a video streaming solution with a controlled energy footprint.
SimpleRAN Project, co-financed by the French government and the European Union-Next Generation EU, aims to develop virtualized mobile networks (vRANs) for 5G/6G, based on a minimalist distributed architecture.
MERCI (Media and Event Production via Resilient Communication on IoT Infrastructure) Project, co-funded by the French government and the European Union-Next Generation EU, aims to develop innovative solutions for private 5G networks based on or complemented by the ETSI DECT-2020 NR standard.
Hyper Open X Project, co-funded by the French government and the European Union-Next Generation EU, aims to develop an open-source cloud framework, integrating major French cloud computing players with a focus on sovereignty, data protection, and fair competition.


== References ==