CalyxOS is an Android-based operating system for select smartphones, foldables and tablets with mostly free and open-source software. It is produced by the Calyx Institute as part of its mission to "defend online privacy, security and accessibility."
CalyxOS preserves the Android security model, using Android's Verified Boot system of cryptographic signing of the operating system, and running with a locked bootloader. CalyxOS also features an installer that guides the user through the process of unlocking and then re-locking the bootloader.


== History ==
The Calyx Institute annual reports state CalyxOS was publicly launched during their 2018–2019 fiscal year. Inspiration included Tails and Qubes OS, and goals were said to be "completely open source", removing proprietary Google tracking, and including apps Tor, Signal and CalyxVPN for increased privacy.
CalyxOS supports select Google Pixel, Motorola and Fairphone devices, while offering "extended support" for some older Google Pixel devices and the SHIFT SHIFT6mq. 
Around April 2022, CalyxOS announced support for the Fairphone 4, OnePlus 8T, 9, and 9 Pro. 
However, in May 2022, CalyxOS announced OnePlus builds were pulled because the bootloader could no longer be relocked on newer device firmware.
In March 2024, CalyxOS added support for the Fairphone 5.
On August 1st 2025, the Calyx Institute published a letter which announced that CalyxOS development had been paused. The development pause was due to Calyx Institute founder, Nicholas Merrill and CalyxOS tech lead, Chirayu Desai leaving the organization. An update to the letter on August 5th 2025, recommended that current users uninstall CalyxOS, due to the lack of security updates during the development pause.


== Software ==

CalyxOS ships with MicroG as an open-source alternative to the Google Mobile Services, including Mozilla Location Services as an optional replacement to the location services provided by Google, but gives the user the option to disable microG and its location services.


== Reception ==
In October 2020, Moritz Tremmel reviewed CalyxOS. A month later, Tremmel explained why he preferred CalyxOS over LineageOS. A year later in September 2021, Tremmel further explained how CalyxOS was different from other ROMs because it did not require as much "fiddling". Rahul Nambiampurath, writing for MakeUseOf in March 2021, termed CalyxOS, "[one of the] best [Android] ROMs for privacy ... offers the perfect middle ground between convenience and privacy". In August 2021, Android Authority wrote CalyxOS "puts privacy and security into the hands of everyday users."
In 2022, the book c't Sicher ins Netz: How to block out monitors and attackers, said "CalyxOS is one of the youngest custom ROMs, it will only celebrate its second birthday in summer 2022. With a built-in Datura firewall, VPN and Cloudflare DNS, Calyx promises more security than some other mobile systems."
In 2023, CalyxOS was the one alternative phone operating system recommended by Carey Parker in the book Firewalls Don't Stop Dragons.


== See also ==

Comparison of mobile operating systems
List of custom Android distributions
Security-focused operating system
Guardian Project


== References ==