Hayu (stylized as hayu and pronounced  HAY-yoo) is an American-owned global over-the-top subscription video on-demand streaming television service, introduced in 2016. 
The service is operated by a United Kingdom-based subsidiary of U.S. media company NBCUniversal, a division of Comcast, and primarily features content from NBCUniversal's American media properties.


== Overview ==
From NBCUniversal, Hayu is the first all-reality subscription video-on-demand streaming service of its kind – offering every episode and every season of a broad selection of reality TV franchises, all in one place and available the same day as the USA. The majority of Hayu’s content premieres on NBCU’s US channels: Bravo, E! and Oxygen. 
Hayu is available in 45 markets (outside the US) including: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Kosovo, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the United Kingdom on a full array of devices (mobile, tablet, laptop, connected TVs and selected consoles) at www.Hayu.com.
In July 2024, NBCUniversal expanded Hayu to ITV’s premium streaming service in the UK, ITVX. In September 2024, NBCUniversal expanded Hayu to M6 Group's premium streaming service in France, M6+.
On 26 October 2024, Hayu announced The Real Housewives of London as its first-ever commission of an original series. The series is set to premiere exclusively on the service in 2025.


== Selected Programming ==
Bad Girls Club
Below Deck
Below Deck Down Under
Below Deck Mediterranean
Below Deck Sailing Yacht
Botched
Euros of Hollywood
Game of Crowns
Jerseylicious
Keeping up with the Kardashians
Ladies of London
Million Dollar Listing
Model Squad
Real Girlfriends in Paris
The Real Housewives (Dallas, Lagos, Melbourne, Cheshire, Johannesburg, Auckland, Toronto, D.C., Dubai, Vancouver, Jersey, Miami, Durban, Potomac, London, Beverly Hills, Sydney, Atlanta, New Jersey, Orange County, New York City & Salt Lake City)
Rich Kids of Beverly Hills
Snapped
Snapped: Killer Couples
Top Chef
Vanderpump Rules
Southern Charm
Summer House
WAGS
Winter House


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website