Hyland Software is the developer of the enterprise content management (ECM) and process management software suite called OnBase. Applications of the suite are used in  healthcare, financial institutions, insurance, government, higher education and manufacturing. The firm has its headquarters in Westlake, Ohio, and offices in Lincoln, Nebraska; Irvine, California; Charlotte, North Carolina; São Paulo, Brazil; London, England; Tokyo, Japan; Andover, Massachusetts; Melbourne, Australia; Kolkata, India; Sydney, Australia; Berlin, Germany; Olathe, Kansas; Bloomington, Minnesota; Salt Lake City, Utah; Phoenix, Arizona; and Tampa, Florida.


== Corporate history ==


=== Founding ===
The company was founded in 1991 by Packy Hyland Jr. He created a program in BASIC and sold it to the Nacedah Bank to store reports on Optical disks to meet compliance requirements, while reducing time required to find documents. In January 1992, Packy Hyland hired Miguel Zubizarreta to create a commercial software product. Miguel Zubizarreta invented the OnBase product, a client server, windows 3.0 based, C++ object-oriented solution that used the Oracle relational database as a backend. This first version of OnBase was installed at the Necedah Bank, the Bank of St.Cloud and the Roseville Bank. 
The OnBase product was white-labeled and sold by most of the major core providers in the Banking Industry. By 2000, over 1000 banks had the OnBase system, which was the leading check processing solution in the community banking industry. Hyland started aggressively selling through regional resellers to local and state governments, universities, insurance companies and hospitals.  Eventually Hyland integrated with Epic and Guidewire, establishing strong paths to markets with leading providers. 


=== Acquisition history ===
September 1, 2006: Matrix Imaging, a private enterprise content management company in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan specializing in the higher education sector
July 1, 2008: Liberty Information Management Systems (IMS), a private Costa Mesa, California-based enterprise content management company. Hyland acquired the company to gain a larger customer and partner base. The office in California, with a move from Costa Mesa to Irvine, has been maintained.
July 1, 2009: Valco Data Systems, a private, Salem, New Hampshire-based healthcare software and software integration company Valco's software was noted for being strongly integrated with software from MEDITECH.
March 1, 2010: eHealth, a private, Reading, Massachusetts-based provider of hosted medical records workflow  Their specific expertise is in the areas of coding and revenue cycle workflow.
March 1, 2010: eWebHealth, a private, Reading, Massachusetts-based provider of hosted medical records workflow  Their specific expertise is in the areas of coding and revenue cycle workflow.
September 1, 2010: Hershey Systems, a private, Santa Fe Springs, California maker of Singularity, a document management system marketed to higher education institutions 
September 24, 2010: Computer Systems Company, Inc. (dba The CSC Group), a private, Strongsville, Ohio-based provider of healthcare software and document conversion services.
August 29, 2012: SIRE Technologies, Inc., a private, Salt Lake City, Utah-based software developer focused on stuff for county and local governments
December 2012: Enterprise Consulting Partners (ECP), a private, Reston, VA-based software focused on workflow automation and document management solutions that support business processes  invoice automation, billing, contract management, purchase requisitioning and Human Resources.
December 2012: Enterprise Consulting Partners (ECP), a private, Reston, VA-based software focused on workflow automation and document management solutions that support business processes invoice automation, billing, contract management, purchase requisitioning and Human Resources.
February 28, 2013: AnyDoc Software, a Tampa, Florida-based software developer focused on automated document, data capture and classification
June 1, 2014: CALYX, a private, Belrose, Australia-based software company
October 13, 2015: LawLogix, a Phoenix, Arizona-based software company specializing in cloud-based immigration and compliance software
May 2016: MicroSoft ECM, a private, Indianapolis, IN- based software company
July 7, 2017: the Perceptive business unit from Lexmark International, Inc. including the products Perceptive Content (formerly ImageNow), Perceptive Capture (formerly Brainware), Acuo VNA, PACSGEAR, Clarion, Nolij, Superion, Pallas Athena, ISYS and Twisting
October 22, 2020: Hyland announced the acquisition of Alfresco Software
April 8, 2021: Hyland announced the acquisition of Nuxeo.


=== Major industries ===
Healthcare
Government
Higher Education
Commercial
Financial Services
Insurance
Manufacturing


=== Key people ===
Packy Hyland, Jr. is the founder of Hyland Software and developed the first version of OnBase for The Necedah Bank in Wisconsin in 1991.  He served as CEO and President until 2001, when he was succeeded by his brother, A.J. Hyland, who retired in 2013 and was succeed after by Bill Priemer, formerly the firm's Chief Operating Officer. Jitesh Ghai is the current President and CEO, and succeeded Bill Priemer on May 20, 2024. Miguel Zubizarreta was responsible for the architecture and product development direction of the OnBase product lines from 1992 as VP development and later CTO until his retirement in July of 2016. Chris Hyland managed the company finances from a small company in 1992, through the cash flow difficult years before profitability and then as CFO and until his retirement in 2020.


== Product ==

Hyland Software's OnBase product integrates document management, business process automation and records management. Industry analysts such as Forrester Research focus on the product's foundational ECM functionality, like imaging and archiving capabilities, as its strengths.
The OnBase product also offers integrations with Microsoft, SAP, Oracle Corporation and Lawson to gain more value from existing technologies. OnBase is written in .NET, JavaScript. OnBase was named 2015 Best in KLAS for Document Management and Imaging.


== Services ==


=== The OnBase Cloud ===
Hyland offers a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) application of OnBase software known as the OnBase Cloud. This service is a cloud-based version of Hyland's traditional OnBase product offering; applications are hosted at a data center and accessed over a secure Internet connection.


=== Alfresco Cloud ===
Hyland offers a Platform as a service (PaaS) cloud-hosted platform of Alfresco Content Services, with customisation via Alfresco Module Packages (AMPs) and Alfresco Developer Framework (ADF) applications.


=== Nuxeo Cloud ===
Hyland offers a Platform as a service (PaaS) cloud-hosted platform of Nuxeo Content Services, configuration can be done using Nuxeo Studio. 


=== Nuxeo Studio ===
Nuxeo Studio is offered as a Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) application for configuration and customisation of Nuxeo Platform. 


== Recognition ==
In 2014, 2015, and 2016 the company was ranked as one of Fortune's 100 Best Companies to Work For list, rising to position 48 in 2016.
Hyland has, however, been the subject of a corruption probe in relation to the sale of its technology to the local government of Cuyahoga County, Ohio.  Notably, the company improperly received a $1.2 million contract from the county, which ultimately resulted in the indictment of a public official on numerous charges.


== References ==


== External links ==

Hyland, creator of OnBase official website
ECM 101 Research Guide
Gartner Magic Quadrant Update, Document Imaging Talk, November 22, 2010