Lucius II: The Prophecy is a horror adventure sandbox game that serves as a loose sequel to the original Lucius. Developed and published by Shiver Games, it was announced in August 2014 and released in February 2015 for Microsoft Windows. The game received mixed reviews from critics. A sequel, titled Lucius III, was released in 2018.


== Gameplay ==
Focusing on addressing the criticisms of linearity in the original Lucius, Lucius II offers players a variety of ways to complete their objectives. Players are given the supernatural powers of Mind Control, Telekinesis, and Pyrokinesis to use as they wish. Killing NPCs and finding secrets scattered throughout levels allows players to level up in order to upgrade and earn new supernatural powers.


== Plot ==
Following the events of the first game, Detective McGuffin drives Lucius to St. Benedict's Hospital for psychiatric evaluation. Upon arriving, Lucius reveals he's the son of the devil. That night, McGuffin is visited by Lucifer, who converts McGuffin to his side and convinces him to protect Lucius in the future. In the meantime, Lucius' powers vanish.
Six months later, two doctors attempt to give Lucius electroshock therapy after he attacks a nun. Upon doing so, Lucius regains some of his power and kills the doctors. While escaping, Lucius discovers that some members of his cult have been committing suicide, while others are ranting about a town called Ludlow that's seeing an uptick in murders. Lucius becomes aware of Isaac, another one of Lucifer's sons, who is looking to gain his own favor with his father by killing people in Ludlow. Lucius calls McGuffin, and uses him to escape the hospital.
The two arrive in Ludlow, with Lucius planning to fulfill an apocalyptic prophecy to appease his father. However, he discovers that Isaac has already started the process. To catch up, Lucius and McGuffin poison the water supply, destroy the power plant, and set free a swarm of locusts. Lucius comes across Isaac at a farm, and seemingly kills him using salt. 
Lucius returns to Ludlow to perform the final steps of the prophecy, but Isaac returns and attempts to kill him. Lucius is able to finally kill Isaac, and finish the prophecy, obtaining a sacred scroll with seven seals that need to be undone. Lucius then escapes from Ludlow in the back of an evacuation bus. It's revealed that McGuffin is driving the bus, and Lucifer is one of its passengers, with the latter telling Lucius that he has more sons, but he believes Lucius will be the one to bring about the apocalypse.
In a post credits scene, Lucius slaughters everyone else on the bus.


== Sequel ==
A sequel titled Lucius III was subsequently released on 13 December 2018, continuing the narrative and expanding on the gameplay mechanics introduced in Lucius II.


== Reception ==

Upon its release, Lucius II received mixed reviews from critics. While some praised the game's departure from linearity, diverse gameplay mechanics, and eerie atmosphere, others expressed concerns about certain aspects of the game.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website