The Nokia C6-00 is a smartphone manufactured by Nokia, running the Symbian S60v5 operating system. It was announced on April 13, 2010. It is the fifth Symbian-based Nokia device featuring a slide-out QWERTY keyboard. It shares most of its hardware and software specifications as the N97 mini . One of the differences is that the sliding mechanism is flat, unlike the upward angle in the N97 and more similar to the Nokia E75. The phone has a 5-megapixel camera, though unlike the N97 mini, it lacked the Zeiss optics. It also has a secondary camera in front for video calls. The Nokia C6-01 is the successor to the C6-00 featuring the newer Symbian^3 operating system, but omitted the keyboard.
All applications for similar devices like the N97, the N97 Mini, the 5800 XpressMusic, and the 5230/5530 are compatible with the C6-00.


== Reviews ==
Cnet UK wrote that 'The C6 suffers from the worst excesses of the N97's software, without the saving grace of its solid hardware, resulting in a phone that's disappointing at any price.' Cnet Asia wrote that though the user interface is slow and outdated. However, they like the improved connectivity features, free real-time navigation with Ovi Maps and the generally well-built chassis. 
T3 magazine said that 'This is a decent phone, but unlikely to convert anyone to Symbian, making it a handset for Nokia fans, with the priority of texting and emailing'. while techradar.com gave it three out of five stars and stated that while the phone had useful widgets and a nice screen that those features were countered by general usability frustrations. Stuff.TV also gave the phone three out of five stars and said that the C6 was an 'efficient enough phone' but felt outdated. Electricpig gave the phone two out of five stars and wrote that loved the sturdy nature of the phone and Nseries specifications but that they hated the unresponsive screen and bad button design.
Nokia C6-00 is currently non upgradeable to Symbian Belle Operating system.


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Nokia C6 at Wikimedia Commons

Nokia C6
Nokia C6 Mobile Themes


=== Videos ===
Nokia C6
Nokia C6 brings the best messaging together