Shorten (SHN) is a file format used for compressing audio data. It is a form of data compression of files and is used to losslessly compress CD-quality audio files (44.1 kHz 16-bit stereo PCM). Shorten is no longer developed and other lossless audio codecs such as FLAC, Monkey's Audio (APE), TTA, and WavPack (WV) have become more popular. It is still in use to trade concert recordings that are already encoded as Shorten files. Shorten files use the .shn file extension.


== Handling Shorten files ==
All libavcodec based players and converters support decoding the Shorten format;  and since the LAVFilters are based on libavcodec, support can easily be added to Windows Media Player and other software that uses the standard filter / codec APIs. As far as less common programs, some Rockbox applications can play Shorten files without decompression, and third-party Shorten plug-ins exist for Nero Burning ROM, Foobar2000, and Winamp. VLC media player supports Shorten files natively, and ffplay from the ffmpeg package can be used if a command line utility is desired.


== See also ==
FLAC
MPEG-4 ALS
Meridian Lossless Packing
Monkey's Audio (APE)
WavPack


== References ==


== External links ==

Shorten Research Paper, written by the author of Shorten and detailing how it works.
Trader's Little Helper Download page. Trader's Little helper converts shn to wav among other things
etree.org Wiki article.  etree.org is a  trading site for authorized recordings of live performances; etree formerly used Shorten exclusively but is increasingly using FLAC.
Shorten FAQ (note: If looking for software to play .shn files, you will probably be better served by the etree software page, as the Shorten FAQ has many broken and outdated links.)
Lossless audio formats, a performance comparison of lossless audio formats, including Shorten.
A Small SHN and MD5 FAQ Includes a decent list of programs to handle Shorten files.
SHN Format Conversion, an online tool for converting SHN files to other formats.