The Anadrinë offensive also known as the "Battle of Anadrinë" or the "Battle of Gradish" was a key-confrontation of the early phase of the Kosovo War. It happened during 12-14 May 1998 and marked the escalation of the war in the Anadrinë region.


== Background ==
Throughout the early phases of the Kosovo War, the KLA militants had smuggled many weapons from Albania on multiple occasions. One of the villages in which weapons were smuggled to and later distributed from was the village of Drenoc. Drenoc was captured by the KLA on 26 April 1998 as a result of the successful 1st Battles of Drenoc after a short clash, leading to escalations of tensions in the Anadrinë region, a region near Orahovac which consisted of 22 villages. One of the villages was Ratkoc, which was mostly inhabited by ethnic Serbs. According to the KLA, the Serbian population of the village was on "good-terms" with them despite the fighting in the surrounding villages and there being a Serbian police station in the village. On 11 may the Serbian police attacked Drenoc, aiming to capture the village, however the KLA repelled their attack as a result of the 2nd Battle of Drenoc. Due to this, the Serbian population of Ratkoc allowed the Serbian police to position themselves within civilian houses in the village.


== Fighting ==
On 12 May 1998, Serbian police stationed in the police station and houses of Ratkoc fired upon a KLA vehicle, ambushing them leading to heavy fighting breaking out. The same day large amounts of Yugoslav troops, tanks and pinzgauers attacked KLA positions in Gradish hill. According to the KLA, the Yugoslav forces also utilized several helicopters in the attack. The KLA held their positions on the hill as fighting broke-out in the nearby villages on 13 May. The KLA were able to surround the Yugoslav forces in Malësia e Vogël and were also able to capture the village and police station of Ratkoc, leading to the Yugoslav forces reinforcing their positions. With the "newly-arrived" reinforcements the Yugoslav troops would attack the KLA positions on Gradish Hill from behind, leading to the KLA calling reinforcements from the "Lumi" unit from Mališevo and the "Pëllumbi" unit from Klina; both from the 3rd Operational Zone. With help from the reinforcements the KLA were able to brake the encirclement with the Yugoslav forces withdrawing from Anadrinë. During the withdrawal the Yugoslav troops killed 3 male Albanian civilians who refused to leave the village of Bratani. The KLA would go on to loose 3 militants in the battle and another 3 would be injured, however the Yugoslav casualties would be greater, including damages on tanks and armored vehicles.


== References ==