Liechtenstein's foreign economic policy has been dominated by its customs union with Switzerland (and with Austria-Hungary until World War I). This union also led to its independent membership in the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) in 1991. Unlike Switzerland however (where citizens rejected membership in a referendum), Liechtenstein is part of the European Economic Area.
Liechtenstein was admitted to the United Nations in 1990. It is not a member of most specialized agencies of the United Nations, with the exceptions of the International Telecommunication Union, the Universal Postal Union and the World Intellectual Property Organization.
Liechtenstein has resorted two times to international dispute settlement by the International Court of Justice, in the Nottebohm (Liechtenstein v. Guatemala) case against Guatemala in the 1950s and in a case concerning art property of the Liechtenstein family against Germany in 2005. It lost in both cases.
Liechtenstein maintains resident embassies in Austria, Belgium, Germany, the Holy See, Switzerland and the United States, along with a number of missions to international organisations. Under a 1919 agreement between Liechtenstein and Switzerland, ambassadors of Switzerland are authorised to represent Liechtenstein in countries and in diplomatic situations unless Liechtenstein opts to send its own ambassador. As of 2024, Liechtenstein has diplomatic relations with 133 UN countries.


== Relations with individual countries ==


=== International dispute with Czechoslovakia, the Czech Republic and Slovakia ===

The country has an international dispute with the Czech Republic and Slovakia concerning the estates of its princely family in those countries. After World War II, Czechoslovakia, as it then was, acting to seize what it considered to be German possessions, expropriated the entirety of the Liechtenstein dynasty's hereditary lands and possessions in the Czech regions of Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia. The expropriations (which were the subject of an unsuccessful court case brought by Liechtenstein in the German courts and the International Court of Justice) included over 1,600 km2 (620 sq mi)   (which is ten times the size of Liechtenstein) of agricultural and forest land mostly in Moravia, also including several family castles and palaces. An offer from the Czech Republic to return the palaces and castles (without the surrounding land) was rejected by Liechtenstein.
Liechtenstein recognised and established diplomatic relations with the Czech Republic on 13 July 2009 and with Slovakia on 9 December 2009. Liechtenstein's ruling prince, Hans-Adam II, has announced that the principality will take no further legal action to recover the appropriated assets.
In February 2020, the Czech Constitutional court in Brno rejected a case made by Liechtenstein to get the Czech government to change their classification of the Liechtenstein dynasty as German under the Beneš Decrees. On 19 August 2020, an inter-state application under the European Convention on Human Rights was made by Liechtenstein to the European Court of Human Rights against the Czech Republic.


== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Liechtenstein maintains diplomatic relations with:


== Bilateral relations ==


=== Americas ===


=== Asia ===


=== Europe ===


== Membership in international organizations ==

Liechtenstein is a member of the following international organizations:

United Nations
Council of Europe
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
European Economic Area
European Free Trade Association
International Atomic Energy Agency
International Criminal Court
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
Intelsat
Interpol
International Olympic Committee
International Telecommunication Union
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
Permanent Court of Arbitration
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
Universal Postal Union
World Confederation of Labour
World Intellectual Property Organization
World Trade Organization
Liechtenstein was never a member of the League of Nations. Its application to join that international organisation was refused in 1920 due to its small size. While included in the Schengen Area, Liechtenstein is not a member of the European Union.


== See also ==
Liechtenstein–European Union relations
List of ambassadors to Liechtenstein
List of diplomatic missions in Liechtenstein
List of diplomatic missions of Liechtenstein
Visa requirements for Liechtenstein citizens


== References ==