Press coverage of World War I was affected by restrictions on the movement of non-combatant observers and strict censorship. This raises the question of the role the media plays in selecting news about such conflicts. Events which support the position of either one of the protagonists in a conflict are understood as instrumental factors in the modern mediated conflict, and the publication of information on these events is construed as one of the major goals of the conflicting parties and one important activity of journalists.
In Britain, there were initially five official accredited war correspondents: Philip Gibbs, Percival Philips, Henry Perry Robinson, Herbert Russell, and William Beach Thomas. Their reports were vetted by C. E. Montague. Other writers and journalists who later received official accreditation from the British government were John Buchan, Robert Donald, Hamilton Fyfe, Henry Nevinson, and Valentine Williams.


== Partial list ==

Ellis Ashmead-Bartlett, The Daily Telegraph
Charles Bean, Sydney Morning Herald (New South Wales, Australia).
Valery Bryusov, Russkiye Vedomosti, (Moscow).
Gaston Chérau, L'Illustration
Basil Clarke, Daily Mail
Richard Harding Davis, Wheeler Syndicate (USA), Daily Chronicle (London)
Albert K. Dawson, American photojournalist and film correspondent
Rheta Childe Dorr
Granville Roland Fortescue, Daily Telegraph (London)
Hamilton Fyfe, Daily Mail (London).
Floyd Gibbons, Chicago Tribune
Philip Gibbs, The War Illustrated (London); Daily Chronicle (London).
Louis Grondijs, Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant (Rotterdam); L'Illustration (Paris); Daily Telegraph.
Henry Gullett (Australia) 
Corra Mae Harris, one of the first women war correspondents to go abroad for the war
Bertie 'B J' Hodson, Central News Agency
Peggy Hull, She was published in the Chicago Tribune (Army edition), along with the Junction City Daily Sentinel.
Will Irvin, Collier's
Edwin Leland James, The New York Times
F. Tennyson Jesse, Collier's
Robert Scotland Liddell, The Sphere
Louise Mack, The Evening News, Daily Mail
Gerald Morgan, Collier's
Keith Murdoch, Melbourne Herald and Sydney Sun (Australia)
E. Alexander Powell, New York World, Scribner's, Daily Mail
Mikhail Prishvin, Rech, (Saint Petersburg).
John Reed
Charles à Court Repington, The Times
Mary Roberts Rinehart, The Saturday Evening Post.
Charles Patrick Smith, The Argus (Melbourne)
Hermann Alfred Tanner, Basler Nachrichten
William Beach Thomas, Daily Mail.
Aleksey Tolstoy, Russkiye Vedomosti, (Moscow).
Frederick Villiers, Illustrated London News.
Alice Waterman


== See also ==
List of participants to Paris Peace Conference, 1919
Military attachés and observers in the Russo-Japanese War
United Nations Military Observer


== Notes ==


== References ==
Kepplinger, Hans Mathias; Brosius, Hans-Bernd; Staab, Joachim Friedrich (September 1991). "Instrumental Actualization: A Theory of Mediated Conflicts". European Journal of Communication. 6 (3): 263–290. doi:10.1177/0267323191006003002. ISSN 0020-2754. JSTOR 3650646. S2CID 145150113.
Strachan, Hew (2001). The First World War: To Arms. Vol. I. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-926191-8.
Stringer, Harry R. (1919). Heroes All!: A Compendium of the Names and Official Citations of the Soldiers and Citizens of the United States and of Her Allies who Were Decorated by the American Government for Exceptional Heroism and Conspicuous Service Above and Beyond the Call of Duty in the War with Germany, 1917-1919. Fassett Publishing Company. OCLC 394536.


== Further reading ==
Luckhart, Tim. "War Correspondents". encyclopedia.1914-1918-online.net. International Encyclopedia of the First World War (WW1).