Oleg Valeryevich Sokolov (Russian: Оле́г Вале́рьевич Соколо́в; born 9 July 1956) is a Russian convicted murderer and former historian who specialized in the Napoleonic era. In November 2019, he murdered, then subsequently dismembered and decapitated his 24-year-old mistress and former student Anastasia Yeshchenko. In December 2020, he was found guilty of intentional murder and sentenced to 12.5 years in high-security prison. He was an  associate professor (docent) in history at Saint Petersburg State University until his dismissal.


== Biography ==

Oleg Sokolov was born on 9 July 1956 in Leningrad (present-day Saint Petersburg), Russian SFSR, Soviet Union.
In 1979, he graduated with a specialist degree in physics and engineering from the Faculty of Physics and Mechanics of the Leningrad Polytechnic Institute.
In 1984, he graduated with honors from the Department of Modern and Contemporary History, Faculty of History of Leningrad State University.
In 1991, under the supervision of Professor Vladimir Revunenkov, a Doctor of Historical Sciences, he defended his dissertation at St. Petersburg State University for the degree of Candidate of Historical Sciences on the topic of The Officer Corps of the French Army Under the Ancien Régime and During the Revolution of 1789–1799 (speciality 07.00.03 – general history). The official opponents were Professor David Pritzker, a Doctor of Historical Sciences, and researcher at the Leningrad Branch of the Institute of History of the USSR Sergey Iskyul, a Candidate of Historical Sciences. The external review was conducted by the Herzen State Pedagogical University of Russia.
Since 2000, he had been an associate professor of the Department of Modern History, Faculty of History of St. Petersburg State University.
He is the author of a number of works on the military history of Europe of the 17th–early 19th centuries. In 1999, he published a major study, Napoleon's Army, which was translated into French in 2003. In 2006, he published the two-volume monograph Austerlitz. Napoleon, Russia and Europe, 1799–1805, a study of the premises and course of Napoleon's first war against the anti-French coalition. He translated into Russian and supplemented with extensive commentary Memoirs of the Napoleonic Wars 1802–1815 (French: Souvenirs militaires d'Octave Levavasseur : officer d'artillerie, aide de camp du Maréchal Ney (1802–1815)) by French officer Octave Levavasseur, who took part in all military campaigns (except for the Russian campaign of 1812) by Napoleon Bonaparte.
He was a prominent figure in Russian historical reenactment. In 1976, he founded the first reenactment group of the Napoleonic era. In February 1989, the Federation of Military History Clubs of the USSR was created and Sokolov became its president. In subsequent years, Sokolov continued to lead the association of clubs involved in reenactment (Military-Historical Association of Russia (1996), All-Russian Military-Historical Social Movement (2006)).
He became a chevalier of the Legion of Honour in 2003.


== Arrest for murder and sentence ==
On 9 November 2019, Sokolov was detained on suspicion of the murder of Anastasia Yeshchenko, his 24-year-old lover, his graduate student at St. Petersburg State University and his co-author of scholarly works. There is an ongoing investigation by the Investigative Committee of Russia. On 11 November, Sokolov was charged with wilful murder (article 105 of the Criminal Code) and was arrested for two months until 8 January 2020 with the detention in the Kresty Prison. On 13 November, his defense lawyer said that Sokolov had given full testimony on the case (he had previously refused to do so, referring to the 51st article of the Constitution of the Russian Federation).
According to the investigation, Sokolov was found in the Moyka River in Saint Petersburg with a backpack containing the woman's arms and a weapon. Local media claims he was drunk and fell into the river as he tried to dispose of the body parts. Police found more body parts in his home, but the package with the victim's torso was not retrieved from the river until 11 November. He has admitted guilt and was willing to cooperate in the investigation. According to Sokolov's defense lawyer, his client filed a confession, but the defense team did not intend to exclude the version of self-incrimination. In addition, his lawyer noted that Sokolov was assigned a psychiatric examination. As Sokolov himself stated during a meeting of the Oktyabrsky District Court of St. Petersburg, the crime was committed on the basis of a personal conflict, because, according to him, Yeshchenko had “recently a terrible reaction to my children” and “she started to freak at their mention” and then they both “lost control” during a quarrel and then “she attacked me with a knife”. During the trial, a video recording made by Sokolov on the day of the murder was published, which recorded a quarrel with Anastasia, who, under great stress, ran out into the cold without outerwear.
On September 23, 2020, during the announcement of the results of the forensic examination in court, the state prosecutor stated that Anastasia Yeshchenko died from a gunshot to the head from a close range. She was shot four times in total, and before that she was strangled, causing non-fatal injuries. According to the conclusion of forensic experts, before her death, Anastasia Yeshchenko was strangled by the neck from both sides. Despite the fractures of the hyoid bone and laryngeal cartilages caused by this strangulation, the cause of her death was a gunshot wound to the head with 5.6 mm lead bullets. She was shot four times, all shots were made in the head, one of the bullets hit the victim in the eye, but by that time Anastasia was already dead from the first shot. Three bullets went through, one remained in the skull.
He is said to have planned to get rid of the body before publicly committing suicide dressed as Napoleon at the Peter and Paul Fortress.
The representative of the Investigative Committee also promised to verify Sokolov's involvement in the beating of another woman. In 2018, the Moskovskij Komsomolets newspaper published an article in which Sokolov's student accused the lecturer of brutal beating in 2008.
Soon after reports of his detention, the Russian Military Historical Society (RMHS), chaired by Minister of Culture Vladimir Medinsky, removed from its website all mention of Oleg Sokolov, who formerly was a member of its scientific council, and the adviser to the RMHS chairman announced that she had heard his name for the first time. French Institute of Social Science, Economics and Politics (ISSEP), founded by Marion Maréchal, the niece of Marine Le Pen, had removed him from his position on its scientific committee on Saturday (9 November).
He was subsequently dismissed from his post at Saint Petersburg State University.
On 25 December 2020, Sokolov was sentenced to twelve years and a half in jail after being convicted of the murder.


== Works ==
Oleg Sokolov is the author of five monographs and over 300 articles on the history of the Napoleonic Wars.


=== Monographs ===
in Russian

in French
Sokolov, O. (2003). L'Armée de Napoléon. Paris: Commios.
Sokolov, O. (2006). Austerlitz. Napoléon, l'Europe et la Russie (PDF). Paris: Commios.
Sokolov, O. (2012). Le Combat de deux empires. La Russie d'Alexandre Ier contre la France de Napoléon, 1805–1812. Paris: Fayard. Archived from the original on 10 November 2019. Retrieved 10 November 2019.
in Polish
Sokołow, O. (2014). Armia Napoleona. Oświęcim: Napoleon V.
Sokołow, O. (2014). Austerlitz Śmiertelne zmagania Francji z Europą i Rosją. Oświęcim: Napoleon V.
Sokołow, O. (2016). Napoleon, Aleksander i Europa 1806–1812. Oświęcim: Napoleon V.


=== Articles ===

in French


=== Translations ===
Levavasseur, Octave (2014).  Воспоминания о наполеоновских войнах 1802—1815 [Memoirs of the Napoleonic Wars 1802–1815] (in Russian). Translated by Sokolov, O. V. Saint Petersburg: Eurasia. ISBN 978-5-906518-16-3.


=== Fiction ===
Sokolov, O. V. (2015). Испанская война и тайна тамплиеров [The Spanish War and the Templars' Mystery]. Plashch i shpaga (in Russian). Saint Petersburg: AST. ISBN 978-5-17-087617-4. Archived from the original on 10 November 2019. Retrieved 10 November 2019.


== Notes and references ==


=== Notes ===


=== References ===


== External links ==
Russia professor admits murder after woman's arms found in bag