Android Go, officially Android (Go edition), is a stripped-down version of the Android operating system, designed for low-end and ultra-budget smartphones (but also used by some tablets). It is intended for smartphones from 2GB to 4GB of RAM and was first made available with the release of Android Oreo.
The first phone pre-installed with Android Go is the Alcatel 1X, which was released in February 2018.
Android 16 Go Edition is expected to released in November 2025. 


== Features ==
Android Go has platform optimizations designed to reduce mobile data usage (including enabling Data Saver mode in Google Chrome by default), and a special suite of Google Mobile Services designed to be less resource and bandwidth-intensive. The Google Play Services package was also modularized to reduce its memory footprint. The Google Play Store will highlight lighter apps suited for these devices.
The operating system's interface differs from that of stock Android, with the quick-settings panel giving greater prominence to information regarding the battery, mobile-data limit, and available storage; the recent apps menu using a modified layout and being limited to four apps (in order to reduce RAM consumption), and an API for allowing mobile carriers to implement data-tracking and top-ups within the Android settings menu. Some system services, such as notification access, split screen and picture-in-picture mode, are disabled to improve performance.
Most devices running Android Go use Google's "stock" Android GUI, although there are several manufacturers that still use customized GUI.


== Versions ==


== See also ==
Comparison of Android Go products
Android One, a version of Android originally designed for entry-level and budget devices
One UI Core, a similar software developed by Samsung for entry-level Galaxy smartphones from 2019 to 2023, Full One UI 6 with limited features will getting for low-end Samsung phones after updating to Android 14.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website