Bigo Live is a global social live streaming platform owned by BIGO Technology based in Singapore, which was founded in 2014 by David Li. As of 2019, Bigo Technology is owned by JOYY Inc.  
Viewers are able to support their favorite broadcasters with in-app gifts, and some popular broadcasters use the app as a full-time employment. BIGO Technology owns Likee, the short video creation and sharing app.


== History ==
David Li entered the technology industry, and in 2014, Bigo was founded in Singapore. 
The live streaming platform was officially launched in March 2016 and is available on both iOS and Android operating systems. 
In November 2019, monthly active users of the company's apps reached over 350 million globally.
In May 2020, Bigo Live launched a partnership with Bark, an online safety product, to keep kids safe online.
In 2022, Bigo Live announced the launch of ‘Community,’ a new interactive feature that allows users to create and manage online communities, as well as post and share original content with other platform users who share similar interests.
In November 2023, Bigo Live announced collaborations with Checkout.com and Visa to streamline international payments for content creators in the UK, Italy, Germany, Switzerland, and Austria.  
A January 2024 Data AI report stated Bigo Live was the second-highest-grossing social app globally in 2023, with its monthly active users increasing by 4.5% to 38.4 million in the last quarter of that year.


== Operations ==
Bigo Live is a global platform for live video broadcasting, enabling users to share content, demonstrate talents, and interact with a global audience through real-time communication and virtual gifting. The app operates in over 150 countries, emphasizing social interaction and community development among its users. 
A key aspect of Bigo Live's operation is the integration of artificial intelligence to enhance user experiences, such as through the use of 3D avatars. The platform has also been recognized for its role in building communities, notably providing a space for Black queer creators to connect and collaborate.


== Controversies ==
In June 2021, Bangladesh police arrested five people, including a Bigo Operation Manager from China, over alleged money laundering and blackmail related to the app. Bigo has been actively cooperating with local authorities to address and resolve these issues, reaffirming its commitment to compliance and community standards.
On 8 December 2024, the New York Times published a report on the use of live-streaming apps "downloaded from Apple and Google" for paid sexual exploitation of children, including Bigo Live. In a statement to the Times, the company said it had taken "appropriate action" on the cases mentioned in the Times article, "including account suspension and content removal". Bigo said it was "deeply committed to protecting user safety".


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website