The iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 14 Pro Max are smartphones that were developed and marketed by Apple. They are the sixteenth generation flagship iPhones, succeeding the iPhone 13 Pro and Pro Max. The devices were unveiled alongside the iPhone 14 and 14 Plus during the Apple Event at Apple Park in Cupertino, California, on September 7, 2022, and were made available on September 16, 2022. 
The iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 14 Pro Max were the first iPhones to have a new type of display cutout called "Dynamic Island", replacing the notch design that has been in use since the iPhone X was introduced. Along with the iPhone 14, iPhone 14 Pro models add bidirectional satellite connectivity to contact emergency services when out of range of Wi-Fi and cellular networks. 
Along with the iPhone 14 and 14 Plus, these were the last iPhones to use a Lightning port; the iPhone 14 Pro models were discontinued in September 2023, and their successors, the iPhone 15 Pro and 15 Pro Max, replaced the Lightning port with USB-C. iPhone 14 Pro models (as well as the iPhone 14 models) sold in the United States dropped support for physical SIM cards, making them the first iPhone models since the CDMA variant of the iPhone 4 to lack a discrete SIM card reader.


== History ==
On November 6, 2022, COVID-19 affected product assembly in Chinese factories, resulting in longer shipment times for some customers.
On September 12, 2023, Apple discontinued and removed iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 14 Pro Max from their official website following the announcement of the iPhone 15 Pro, and 15 Pro Max as their successors.
In May 2024, Apple began selling refurbished iPhone 14 Pro models on their official website.


== Design ==

The design of the iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 14 Pro Max is almost identical to older iPhone models, such as the iPhone 12 Pro and 13 Pro. The iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 14 Pro Max have a new front camera called the Dynamic Island. The Dynamic Island can now bubble up alerts instead of having a notification. This new feature is on the iPhone 15 series (iPhone 15, iPhone 15 Plus, iPhone 15 Pro, iPhone 15 Pro Max), iPhone 16 series (iPhone 16, iPhone 16 Plus, iPhone 16 Pro, iPhone 16 Pro Max), and the new iPhone 17 series (iPhone 17, iPhone Air, iPhone 17 Pro, iPhone 17 Pro Max). The iPhone 14 Pro and 14 Pro Max are available in four colors: Silver, Space Black, Gold and Deep Purple. Deep Purple replaced the Sierra Blue color used on the iPhone 13 Pro and iPhone 13 Pro Max.
It is the final iPhone model in the exterior design to come with the stainless steel form factor along with the gold color option. Following the launch of the iPhone 15 Pro and iPhone 15 Pro Max, the gold color option has been replaced by the new natural titanium color option alongside making the silver color replaced by the new white titanium and the space black color (formerly known as the graphite color used in the iPhone 12 Pro and iPhone 13 Pro) and the space gray color (used in the iPhone X, iPhone XS and iPhone 11 Pro) replaced by the new black titanium.
The iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 14 Pro Max are available in four colors: Space Black, Silver, Gold, and Deep Purple.


== Specifications ==


=== Hardware ===


==== Chipset ====
The iPhone 14 Pro and Pro Max feature a new A16 Bionic system on a chip (SoC), built on TSMC's N4 fabrication process, superseding the A15 Bionic seen on the iPhone 13 and 13 Pro lineup, the 3rd generation iPhone SE, and the iPhone 14 and 14 Plus.


==== Camera ====
The camera sensors and lenses on the main and ultra-wide cameras have been upgraded. The main camera features a new 48-megapixel quad-pixel sensor that is 65% larger than the one on the iPhone 13 Pro. It defaults to 12 megapixels, achieved through a process called pixel binning. However, users can access the full capabilities of the sensor by activating the ProRAW feature. The ultra-wide camera features a new larger 12-megapixel sensor that has 100% focus pixels. The lens has also been improved for optical clarity and features a larger aperture.
The new camera system also incorporates a new "Photonic Engine" for improved image and video quality. Additionally, the video feature now includes Action Mode, which offers video stabilization that can be accessed through the top right corner of the screen. The resolution of the picture can now be customized. The TrueDepth camera has gained autofocus and a larger aperture. It is also capable of focusing on multiple subjects simultaneously.


==== Display ====
The iPhone 14 Pro and Pro Max feature a Super Retina XDR OLED display with a typical maximum brightness of 1,000 nits. However, it can go all the way up to 1,600 nits while watching HDR videos, and 2,000 nits outdoors. The display has a refresh rate of 120 Hz and uses LTPO technology. The iPhone 14 Pro has a resolution of 2556×1179 pixels at 460 pixels per inch (ppi), while the Pro Max variant has a resolution of 2796×1290 pixels at 460 ppi. Both variants have an "always on display" feature, with an adaptive ProMotion 120 Hz refresh rate that can reduce down to 1 Hz to save battery life while in "always on" mode.
Both models feature a new design for the area that surrounds the front-facing camera, which Apple previously referred to as the "TrueDepth camera array" and many users referred to as the "notch". The new design is called the "Dynamic Island", which is now a pill-shaped cutout slightly detached from the top of the screen. This design was achieved by moving Face ID hardware components and some sensors previously housed in the "notch" behind the display, including the ambient light sensor, flood illuminator and proximity sensor. To make this new hardware blend more seamlessly with the software, software animations are added to make the pill shape change shape and size according to app and features being used to display certain alerts and notifications.


==== Battery ====
The iPhone 14 Pro has a 3200 mAh battery that provides 23 hours of video playback and 20 hours of streaming video playback. The Pro Max variant has a 4323 mAh battery that provides 29 hours of video playback and 25 hours of streaming video playback.


==== Connectivity ====
In addition to all the connectivity options offered on previous models, the iPhone 14 Pro and Pro Max can now use satellite connectivity to make calls or send texts in an emergency. The feature is marketed as "Emergency SOS via satellite". It uses the spectrum in L and S bands designated for mobile satellite services by ITU Radio Regulations. When an iPhone user makes an Emergency SOS via satellite request, the message is received by an orbiting satellite operated by Globalstar. The satellite then sends the message down to ground stations located across the globe.
As of November 2022, Globalstar operates a constellation of 24 satellites in low Earth orbit, with plans to enhance this in the future via its partnership with Apple.
The service became available to the public on November 15, 2022. On the same day, Apple announced that it will be extended to France, Germany, Ireland, and the UK in December 2022.
On September 12, 2023, during a launch event, Apple announced Roadside Assistance via satellite, the next feature to make use of the satellite connection capabilities of the iPhone 15 series that was just revealed, as well as the iPhone 14 series. Through a collaboration with AAA, it allows users to request car assistance dispatch in areas without cell service.


=== Software ===

Like the iPhone 14 and 14 Plus, the iPhone 14 Pro and Pro Max were shipped with iOS 16. They also support iOS 17, iOS 18, and iOS 26, with the exception of any Apple Intelligence features added with these updates. The next-generation Qi2 wireless charging standard has been added to the iPhone 14 series of devices with the update to iOS 17.2.


=== Detailed specs ===


== Reception ==
The iPhone 14 Pro has received generally good reviews. Patrick Holland from CNET gave a generally positive review of the phone, highlighting the camera improvements as well as the functionality of the Dynamic Island, though wishing that more functionality for the feature was added. Holland additionally noted a bug on the new Apple Weather app that was later fixed, and how the battery was not improved from the previous year's Pro iPhones, though still deemed it Apple's best offer in iPhone technology of the year.
Holland's opinion was echoed by Tom's Guide writer Jordan Palmer, praising the cameras especially, though noting poorer battery performance and the inconvenience of having no physical SIM card. Palmer still deemed the iPhone 14 Pro the best phone under $1,000. The lack of a SIM card slot was a concern similarly shared by IGN reviewer Kevin Lee, though Lee, like Palmer and Holland, praised the new technology as well as the lack of a price increase compared with the iPhone 13 Pro.


== References ==


== External links ==
iPhone 14 Pro – official website