This is a list of endangered languages with mobile apps available for use in language revitalization.


== Endangered Australian languages with mobile apps ==

The Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages (LAAL) is a digital archive of literature in endangered languages of Australia, containing works in over forty Australian Aboriginal languages from the Northern Territory, Australia. The LAAL Reader app is available on Apple App Store and Google Play.


=== Individual languages ===
Anindilyakwa language (Northern Territory) The NT Languages Anindilyakwa app provides flash cards in English and Anindilyakwa, and provides audio samples of both. Some words also include hand movements in small video clips. Available in Apple and Android
Barngarla language (South Australia) – A mobile app featuring a dictionary of over 3000 Barngarla words.
Erub Mer (Torres Strait Island language, Queensland)
Gamilaraay language (New South Wales) – The Gadjigadji mobile app available for iOS and Android.
Iwaidja language (Northern Territory) – The Ma! Iwadja app is being used to teach the language.
Miriwoong language (Western Australia) – a mobile app dictionary of 1400 words and phrases
Wiradjuri language (New South Wales) – a mobile app available for iOS, Android and a web based version.
Yawuru language (Western Australia)


== Endangered Oceanian languages with mobile apps ==
Hawaiian language – In 2018, Duolingo added a Hawaiian language course. Resources are also available on Memrise.


== Endangered Native American languages with mobile apps ==

Aleut language – A course on Memrise is available.
Arikara language
Blackfoot language – The Siksika Nation has created an app for IOS devices that can be downloaded here.
Caddo language
Cherokee language – Resources available on Mango Languages and Memrise.
Chickasaw language
Choctaw language – A course on Memrise is available.
Comanche language – A course on Memrise is available.
Comox language – A Sliammon iPhone app was released in March 2012. An online dictionary, phrasebook, and language learning portal is available at FirstVoices.
Cowlitz language – The Language Conservancy has made dictionary, vocab builder, media player, and keyboard apps. 
Cree language app – produced by the Maskwacis Cree of Samsun Cree Nation
Dakota language
Haida language – A Skidegate Haida language app is available for iPhone, based on a "bilingual dictionary and phrase collection comprised of words and phrases archived at the online Aboriginal language database FirstVoices.com."
Halkomelem language – A Halkomelem iPhone app was released in 2011.
Inuvialuk language
Konkow language
Kutenai language – A Kutenai language app, Ktunaxa, is available at the FirstVoices website.
Lakota language
Lillooet language
Luiseño language
Mandan language
Navajo language – A Duolingo course is available. Resources are also available on Memrise.
Nisga’a language
Nisqually language – The Language Conservancy has made a keyboard app
Nuu-chah-nulth language
Nheengatu
Ojibwe language
Potawatomi language – A course on Memrise is available.
Quinault language – The Language Conservancy has made a vocab builder app
Saanich dialect
Seneca language – As of January 2013, a Seneca language app was under development. A course on Memrise is available.
Stoney Nakoda language – this app was produced by the Stoney Nakoda Nation.
Tahltan language – The Language Conservancy has made a dictionary app
Tanacross language
Tlingit language
Tłı̨chǫ language
Upper Kuskokwim language
Winnebago language


== Endangered European languages with mobile apps ==
Cornish language – There is a dedicated app. Resources are also available on Memrise.
Irish language – Several courses are available on Drops, Duolingo and Memrise.
Low German – PlattinO App to learn the east Frisisan variety. The app was released by the Ostfrisische Landschaft. ALWiNE released by the University of Greifswald for the Mecklenburgish-West Pomeranian variety.
Manx language
Söl'ring dialect – Mobile friendly web app at friisk.org was released in 2018 for translations, conjugations, and pronunciations.
Ume Sámi – a course created by the speech community on Memrise.
Welsh language – Several courses are available on Memrise.
Yiddish language – Resources are available on Memrise.


== References ==


== External links ==
FirstVoices.com
A review of indigenous language learning apps