Newborn Town Inc. (Chinese: 赤子城; pinyin: chì zǐ chéng) is a global technology company founded in 2009, which became listed on the Main Board of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange (HKEX) in 2019 under the stock code 9911.
Newborn Town has developed a portfolio of social networking applications featuring live-streaming, voice chat rooms, gaming and a series of mobile casual games. Newborn Town’s business has covered the Middle East, North Africa, Southeast Asia, Europe, the United States, Japan and South Korea, reaching over 1 billion users worldwide.


== History ==
In 2013, Newborn Town launched its first AI desktop engine Solo Launcher and 
garnered significant recognition, earning the company Google's "Top Developer & Global Best App" awards. 
In 2014, the company launched the live-streaming social platform MICO, marking its first entry into the pan-audience social networking market. 
In 2018, the company launched the audio social platform YoHo and the game-oriented social networking platform TopTop successively. 
In December 2019, Newborn Town was listed on the main board of the Hong Kong Stock Exchange under the stock code "09911", with an issue price of HKD 1.68 per share. 
In 2022, the premium game "Alice's Dream: Merge Games" was officially launched and received global recognition as a new recommended game on the Google Play Store. 
In 2023, Newborn Town embarked on the exploration of the pan-audience social-networking businesses globally. In August, the company completed the acquisition of BlueCity, and its performance has been incorporated into the company's consolidated financial statements. 
Response to 2023 Earthquakes in Turkey and Syria
In February 2023, in response to the earthquake in Turkey and Syria, Newborn Town initiated an aid campaign engaging its users to support those impacted by the disaster. The company’s local teams visited the affected cities to provide humanitarian aid. Additionally, MICO and YoHo launched livestreams to provide real-time updates and support to the disaster-stricken areas.
In January 2024, Newborn Town launched the LGBTQ+ online content community HeeSay, covering more than 70 countries and regions worldwide.


== References ==