An over-the-top media service, also known as over-the-top television (OTT), is a digital distribution service of video and audio delivered directly to viewers via the public Internet, rather than through an over-the-air, cable, satellite, or IPTV provider. The term is synonymous with streaming platform.
OTT services may be subscription-based or free, and are typically accessed via television sets with integrated Smart TV platforms, streaming devices such as Apple TV, Amazon Fire TV and Roku, video game consoles, websites on personal computers, and apps on smartphones and tablets. 
OTT bypasses broadcast, cable, and satellite transmissions—the system through which companies have traditionally acted as controllers or distributors of television content. This content may include shows and movies for which the OTT acquired licensed rights from the content owner. Programming may also include original content produced by the service or specifically for it.
OTT services include paid services such as Netflix or Amazon Prime Video which provide access to subscription-based film and television content (SVOD), or free ad-supported streaming television (FAST) services such as Pluto TV and Tubi. OTT services also include a range of "skinny" television offerings by streaming platforms, such as Sling TV and Hulu with Live TV, that provide live streams of specialty channels. In 2023, using OTT platforms constituted 38% of global television consumption. OTT TV, commonly called streaming television, is the most popular method for watching television in the United States as of 2025.


== Definitions ==
In 2011, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC), Canada's telecommunications regulator, stated that it "considers that Internet access to programming independent of a facility or network dedicated to its delivery (via, for example, cable or satellite) is the defining feature of what have been termed 'over-the-top' services".
In contrast to video on demand systems offered by cable and IPTV, which operate over managed networks where channels can be changed instantly and thus content available instantaneously, some OTT services such as iTunes require that the video be downloaded first and then played. Relatedly, some OTT services require movie download but can start playing the content before the download completes (streaming).
The United States Federal Communications Commission (FCC) categorizes OTT services into two groups: multichannel video programming distributors (MVPDs) and online video distributors (OVDs).
Virtual MVPDs include such services such as DirecTV Stream, FuboTV, Sling TV, Hulu + Live TV and YouTube TV.

The FCC defined an OVD as:any entity that provides video programming by means of the Internet or other Internet Protocol (IP)-based transmission path where the transmission path is provided by a person other than the OVD. An OVD does not include an MVPD inside its MVPD footprint or an MVPD to the extent it is offering online video programming as a component of an MVPD subscription to customers whose homes are inside its MVPD footprint.


== Background ==
Over-the-top content is delivered via the public Internet instead of a closed, private network system that uses exclusive equipment like set-top boxes, or through Internet Protocol television (IPTV) services (such as U-verse TV).  An Internet service provider (ISP) simply transports the Internet Protocol (IP) packets that deliver OTT content to the end-user. 
In broadcasting, OTT content is the audio, video, and other media content delivered over the Internet, without the involvement of a multiple-system operator (MSO) in the control or distribution of the content. The ISP may be aware of the contents of the IP packets and may be able to block or restrict their transit to end users (unless that internet provider operates within a jurisdiction that requires "net neutrality"). However, the ISP is not responsible for the viewing abilities, copyrights, and/or other redistribution of the content from the OTT provider. This model contrasts with the purchasing or rental of video or audio content from an ISP, such as pay television, video on demand and IPTV.
OTT television signals are received over the Internet or through a cell phone network, as opposed to receiving television signals from terrestrial broadcasters, cable networks, or via satellite transmission. The video distributor controls access through an app, a separate OTT dongle, or a box connected to a phone, PC, or smart television set. By mid-2017, 58 percent of US households accessed one OTT service in a given month through a streaming device, game console, or Smart TV; with 84 per cent of advertising revenues originating from OTT channels, exceeding revenues from videos playing in web browsers on desktops and laptops.
Innovative technologies like cloud computing, powerful data analytics, and the Internet of Things (IoT) are coming together to create a transformational shift in the OTT media landscape. These new developments in technology have the potential to significantly influence the OTT industry's future as customer preferences continue to shift. IoT device integration is opening up new ways for OTT providers to offer immersive and personalized watching experiences, from smart TVs to connected home appliances. OTT platforms are able to curate content and provide personalized suggestions that are catered to individual tastes by utilizing IoT data to obtain deeper insights into user preferences. Cloud computing's scalability and flexibility are enabling OTT companies to adjust to the increasing market demand for streaming and on-demand content. Cloud-based infrastructure makes it possible to scale resources quickly in response to changing viewership patterns, handle data efficiently, and deliver content seamlessly.


== Progress ==
In 2019, the record of simultaneous users watching an OTT event was set at 18.6 million in India by Disney Entertainment's video streaming platform Hotstar. This was surpassed in 2023 with 59 million concurrent viewers on Disney+ Hotstar. In 2025, the record was broken again with 61.2 million viewers on JioHotstar.
In 2023, the viewing of TV content on streaming platforms represented 38% of global television consumption with 1.8 billion subscriptions to OTT platforms. In 2024, OTT TV became the most popular content in the US. By 2025, it had surpassed cable and network television viewing.


== Modes of access ==
Consumers can access OTT content through Internet-connected devices such as smart TVs, digital media players, gaming consoles, set-top boxes, desktop and laptop computers, tablets, and smartphones.
The results of a 2018 in-house data analysis of their subscribers by Uscreen (a membership platform for video creators and entrepreneurs) reported that 45% used iOS and Android mobile devices to access their OTT content, while 39% used web browsers for streaming.


== Streaming platforms ==

Examples of OTT platforms with 1M–100MM+ subscribers include:


== Mobile communication ==
The term "OTT" has also been used to describe no-carrier cellphones, for which all communications are charged as data, avoiding monopolistic competition, or apps for phones that transmit data in this manner, including both those that replace other call methods and those that update software.
OTT messaging is defined as instant messaging services or online chat provided by third parties, as an alternative to text messaging services provided by a mobile network operator. An example is the Meta Platforms-owned mobile application WhatsApp, that serves to replace text messaging on Internet connected smartphones. Other providers of OTT messaging include Viber, WeChat, iMessage, Skype, Telegram and the now defunct Google Allo.
OTT voice calling, usually called VoIP, capabilities, for instance, a softphone or as provided by FaceTime, Skype, Viber, WhatsApp, WeChat, and Zoom use open internet communication protocols to replace and sometimes enhance existing operator controlled services offered by mobile phone operators.


== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Basin, Ken (2024). "2. Streaming: The End, Present, and Future of Television". The Business of Television: Updated and Expanded Second Edition (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1032012995.
Harris, Deja; Holden, Lisa (31 January 2025). "The Complete List of Streaming Services in 2025 – 200+ Services". A Good Movie To Watch. Archived from the original on 7 February 2025.
Wells, Emma K. (11 March 2011). "User Interface Holds the Key to OTT Success". Pay OTT TV. Tvinci. Archived from the original on 18 June 2011.
Willcox, James K. (21 October 2022). "Guide to Streaming Video Services". Consumer Reports. Archived from the original on 11 June 2024.
Yi, Whan-woo (1 May 2024). "Platform subscription fee hikes weigh on consumers". The Korea Times. Archived from the original on 2 June 2024.
"FCC Adopts 15th Report on the Status of Competition in the Market for the Delivery of Video Programming" (PDF). Federal Communications Commission. 19 July 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 September 2018. (Announcement of adoption.)
"OTT 101: The History and Future of OTT Streaming". Conviva. 20 April 2021. Archived from the original on 1 March 2024.
"Over the top (OTT) Market Size Worth USD 128 Billion at CAGR of 14%, By 2026: Reports and Data". EIN Presswire. 1 September 2021. Archived from the original on 14 July 2024.


== External links ==
The Gauge by Nielsen
OTT Platform Providers at OTTBusiness.com