The Legend of Hei II (simplified Chinese: 罗小黑战记2; traditional Chinese: 羅小黑戰記2; pinyin: Luóxiǎohēizhànjì2) is a 2025 Chinese animated action adventure film written and directed by MTJJ and Gu Jie. It was released in theaters across China on July 18, 2025. The film is the sequel to The Legend of Hei (2019).


== Synopsis ==
The story takes place before the animated series and after the first movie. Following an attack on the Spirit World, the peace between the spirits and humans is shattered. Evidence points to Wuxian, putting the master and apprentice in danger. Xiaohei and his senior fellow apprentice, Luye, embark on an adventurous journey to uncover the truth, attempting to uncover the hidden hand behind the attack and prevent the outbreak of war between humans and spirits.


== Production ==


=== Script and setting ===
The Legend of Hei II was produced by the animation studio Hanmu Chunhua (HMCH). Kexin Peng, who also wrote the previous film, continued to serve as the screenwriter.
The Legend of Hei II's script took about a year and a half to write, starting in 2019. The film inherits and expands the worldview of the previous film, while also introducing new characters and conflicts. The writing process was designed with a balance between new and existing audiences in mind, and the worldview and character relationships were introduced in the opening.
Although the movie is set in a modern background, it also incorporated traditional Chinese culture. The film imaginatively depicts the integration of traditional Chinese spirits into modern society: Nezha enjoys playing video games, while spirits not only use public transportation but also become addicted to their smartphones. One of the two producers, Cao Zijian, mentioned that the clothing and settings in the work were refined through extensive research and on-site investigations to ensure authenticity, all in service of the overall style.
Character designs for Xiaohei, Wuxian, and Nezha continue from the previous film, with only new costumes and adjusted proportions for Xiaohei. Luye and the elders are new characters. Luye's design was the most difficult in the entire series, with the production team going through over 200 design drafts before finalizing her design. Luye and Xiaohei represent reality and ideals, respectively. Another producer, Cong Fangbing, explained that Luye's design was inspired by the spiritual dilemma of modern people: she appears cold and sometimes harsh, but she is also reserved and possesses a soft heart. As a war orphan, Luye, after enduring pain, ultimately chooses to accept Wuxian's help and emerge from the shadows of her past. She also possesses a strong spiritual core. The names of some supporting characters in the film are derived from the nicknames of the production staff.
The Legend of Hei II demonstrates an inclusive stance. It doesn't force moral principles, but rather respects everyone's perspective. Between the whitewashing of a never-to-come war and the brutality of a no-win situation after a war, the team, consisting of Xiaohei and Luye, chose to express the message that "we can maintain peace".


=== Animation production ===
The Legend of Hei II was produced using traditional 2D hand-drawn animation, with 3D modeling as an aid. The production cycle lasted six years, with the aircraft combat sequence taking a full year. According to the producers, more than 200,000 hand-drawn genga were used, and there were about 2,400 shots in total. Animation is typically produced using a "one-shot-two" technique (using 12 genga per second in 24p film), but most of the ten action scenes in the film were produced using a "one-shot-one" technique (using 24 genga per second in 24p film), to achieve a smoother and more fluid action.
The Legend of Hei II was created with special consideration for the action design of live-action films and real-world location shooting. For the airplane fighting scenes, an aircraft consultant was hired to show the fighting scenes in a real aircraft flying state. The Cangnan Guild Hall in the film was filmed in Cangnan County, Wenzhou, incorporating the city's elements and the Minnan dialect. The Hanmu Hall in the film is based on the production company's name. The Yuedong Guild Hall serves Cantonese-style morning tea. The "Lingkui Town" sign is a homophone of the local dialect for "Lingxi Town (Cangnan County)".


=== Dubbing ===
The voice cast for The Legend of Hei II remains the same as the original series. Huang Zhenji, who voiced Diting in the original animated series, is the voice director. To ensure Xiaohei's voice is unique, Shan Xin deliberately avoided using Xiaohei's voice when recording other anime characters. Zhu Jing, the voice actor for Luye, emphasized the need to create a sense of contrast in the voice acting to portray Luye's "stable and powerful exterior, yet soft heart." Liu Mingyue, the voice actor for Wuxian, stated that to portray Xiaohei's emotional bond with Wuxian, he chose to "create a sense of an old father."
The voice acting list is as follows:

Xiaohei (小黑, Hei for short, Luo Xiaohei in animated series, lit. 'Little Black')
voiced by:  Shan Xin  (Mandarin);  Kana Hanazawa  (Japanese)
Wuxian (无限, lit. 'Infinity')
voiced by: Liu Mingyue (Mandarin);  Mamoru Miyano  (Japanese)
Luye (鹿野)
voiced by: Zhu Jing (Mandarin)
Naza (哪吒, Parody of Nezha)
voiced by: Shan Xin (Mandarin)
Lingyao
voiced by: Luan Lisheng (Mandarin)
Chinian
voiced by: Fu Chenyang (Mandarin)
Jia (甲, lit. 'Placeholder Person A')
voiced by: Yan Ling (Mandarin)
Yi (乙, lit. 'Placeholder Person B')
voiced by: Chen Qigang (Mandarin)
Xi Muzi
voiced by: Huang Zhenji (Mandarin)
Panjing
voiced by: Li Lu (Mandarin)
Jiulao
voiced by: Chen Siyu (Mandarin)
Zheng Xinyi
voiced by Ren Jingxing (Mandarin)
Captain
voiced by: Ren Jingxing (Mandarin)


== Release and response ==
The Legend of Hei II was released in mainland China on July 18, 2025, and was also scheduled to be released in Japan on November 7. In August 2025, it was announced that the film would be released in the United States and Canada theaters by GKIDS on September 5, 2025.
The Legend of Hei II has a Douban score of 8.7, making it the highest-scoring Chinese-language animated film in theaters as of 2025. China Central Television's entertainment review said that the film maintains and further enhances the series' consistent oriental fantasy. Through a more mature visual expression, the film elevates and integrates Chinese aesthetics with philosophical reflections. It also incorporates traditional Chinese cultural elements into its artistic conception and scenes, presenting them in an innovative way. Sanlian Lifeweek praised the film's action scenes, calling them "the pinnacle of domestic production", and noted that the political dynamics between the spirits and the human elite in the film possessed a realism not previously seen in the series. However, it also questioned the plot's conflict, arguing that the motivations behind the conflict between the spirits and humans were unexplained and merely glossed over as an introduction.
Caixin Media noted that the film's strength lies in its refusal to set the limits of right and wrong, and instead presenting a comprehensive look at each character's perspectives and stances, each influenced by their diverse backgrounds, leaving the judgement to the audience. The film also explicitly hints at a more advanced anti-war narrative: "There are no survivors in war". The Qilu Evening News said that the film goes beyond the positioning of a commercial animation and explores heavy topics such as war, hatred, and trust with gentle yet firm power.


== References ==


== External links ==
The Legend of Hei II at IMDb
The Legend of Hei II at Douban (in Chinese)