Alma Söderhjelm (10 May 1870 – 16 March 1949) was a Swedish-speaking Finnish historian and the first female professor in Finland.


== Academic career ==
After gaining an M.A. in history, Söderhjelm spent three years in Paris, preparing her doctoral thesis under the supervision of Alphonse Aulard. This was a study of journalism during the French Revolution and it was published as Le Régime de la presse pendant la Révolution française. 
She was awarded a doctorate in 1900.
On the basis of this thesis, the university unanimously proposed to award her a lectureship. This appointment was delayed until 1906, because of political concern over her father and her brother. The Emperor was also concerned that if a woman became a lecturer in Finland, the same demand would be made in Russia.
In 1906, she finally became the first female lecturer in Finland. She stayed in this position until 1927. At this point, she became chair of General History at Åbo Akademi University, and thus the first female professor in Finland.
Her academic work also involved editing the correspondence of the French Queen Marie Antoinette with the Swedish nobleman von Fersen and with some French revolutionaries.


== Other activities ==
Söderhjelm worked as a journalist, writing a column for the newspaper Åbo Underrättelser. She also wrote novels, poetry, and a five-volume memoir.
She co-wrote the screenplay for The Blizzard (1923), directed by Mauritz Stiller.
Söderhjelm was politically active. She smuggled journals into Finland from Sweden, and helped military volunteers to move from Sweden into Germany.


== References ==


== External links ==
Works by or about Alma Söderhjelm at the Internet Archive
Alma Söderhjelm in 375 humanists – 27 April 2015. Faculty of Arts, University of Helsinki.


== Further reading ==
Alma Söderhjelm at Svenskt kvinnobiografiskt lexikon
Alma Söderhjelm (1921), Det främmande ögat : utfall och infall / Alma Söderhjelm., Skrifter utgivna av Svenska litteratursällskapet i Finland (in Swedish), Helsinki: Society of Swedish Literature in Finland, ISSN 0039-6842, Wikidata Q113518935