A jester, also known as joker, court jester, or fool, was a member of the household of a nobleman or a monarch kept to entertain guests at the royal court. Jesters were also travelling performers who entertained common folk at fairs and town markets, and the discipline continues into the modern day, where jesters perform at historical-themed events. Jester-like figures were common throughout the world, including Ancient Rome, China, Persia, and the Aztec Empire.
During the post-classical and Renaissance eras, jesters are often thought to have worn brightly coloured clothes and eccentric hats in a motley pattern. Jesters entertained with a wide variety of skills: principal among them were song, music, and storytelling, but many also employed acrobatics, juggling, telling jokes (such as puns and imitation), and performing magic tricks. Much of the entertainment was performed in a comic style. Many jesters made contemporary jokes in word or song about people or events well known to their audiences.


== Etymology ==
The modern use of the English word jester did not come into use until the mid-16th century, during Tudor times. This modern term derives from the older form gestour, or jestour, originally from French meaning 'storyteller' or 'minstrel'. Other earlier terms included fol, disour, buffoon, and bourder. These terms described entertainers who differed in their skills and performances but who all shared many similarities in their role as comedic performers for their audiences.


== History ==


=== Balatrones ===
In ancient Rome, a balatro ([ˈba.la.troː]) was a professional jester or buffoon. Balatrones were paid for their jests, and the tables of the wealthy were generally open to them for the sake of the amusement they afforded.
There are various theories about the origin of the term. In Horace, Balatro is used as a proper name: Servilius Balatro. An old scholiast derives the common word balatro from the proper name, suggesting that buffoons were called balatrones because Servilius Balatro was a buffoon, though others have since objected to this account. Festus derives the word from blatea, and supposes buffoons to have been called balatrones because they were dirty fellows, covered with spots of mud (blateae) from walking. Another writer suggests a derivation from barathrum, because they, so to speak, carried their jesting to market, even into the very depth (barathrum) of the shambles (barathrum macelli) Balatro may be connected with balare, "to bleat like a sheep", and hence, to speak sillily. Others have suggested a connection with blatero, a busy-body.
Jester-like figures have been common throughout the world. They were known in China, Persia, and the Aztec empire.


=== English royal court jesters ===
Many royal courts throughout English royal history employed entertainers and most had professional fools, sometimes called "licensed fools". Fool Societies, or groups of nomadic entertainers, were often hired to perform acrobatics and juggling.
Jesters were also occasionally used as psychological warfare. Jesters would ride in front of their troops, provoke or mock the enemy, and even serve as messengers. They played an important part in raising their own army's spirits by singing songs and reciting stories.
Henry VIII of England employed a jester named Will Sommers. His daughter Mary was entertained by Jane Foole.
During the reigns of Elizabeth I and James I of England, William Shakespeare wrote his plays and performed with his theatre company the Lord Chamberlain's Men (later called the King's Men). Clowns and jesters were featured in Shakespeare's plays, and the company's expert on jesting was Robert Armin, author of the book Foole upon Foole. In Shakespeare's Twelfth Night, Feste the jester is described as "wise enough to play the fool".
In Scotland, Mary, Queen of Scots, had a jester called Nichola. Her son, King James VI of Scotland, employed a jester called Archibald Armstrong. During his lifetime Armstrong was given great honours at court. He was eventually thrown out of the King's employment when he over-reached and insulted too many influential people. Even after his disgrace, books telling of his jests were sold in London streets. He held some influence at court still in the reign of Charles I and estates of land in Ireland. Anne of Denmark had a Scottish jester called Tom Durie. Charles I later employed a jester called Jeffrey Hudson who was very popular and loyal. Jeffrey Hudson had the title of "Royal Dwarf" because he was short of stature. One of his jests was to be presented hidden in a giant pie from which he would leap out. Hudson fought on the Royalist side in the English Civil War. A third jester associated with Charles I was called Muckle John.


=== Jester's privilege ===
Jester's privilege is the ability and right of a jester to talk and mock freely without being punished. As an acknowledgement of this right, the court jester had symbols denoting their status and protection under the law. The crown (cap and bells) and sceptre (marotte) mirrored the royal crown and sceptre wielded by a monarch.
Martin Luther used jest in many of his criticisms against the Catholic Church. In the introduction to his To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation, he calls himself a court jester, and, later in the text, he explicitly invokes the jester's privilege when saying that monks should break their chastity vows.


== Political significance ==
Jesters could give bad news to the King that no one else would dare deliver. In 1340, when the English navy destroyed a French fleet at the Battle of Sluys, Philip VI of France's jester told him the English sailors "don't even have the guts to jump into the water like our brave French".


=== End of tradition ===
After the Restoration, Charles II did not reinstate the tradition of the court jester, but he did greatly patronise the theatre and proto-music hall entertainments, especially favouring the work of Thomas Killigrew. Though not officially a jester, Samuel Pepys records being told that Killigrew "hath a fee out of the Wardrobe for cap and bells, under the title of the King's Foole or jester".
In the 18th century, jesters had died out except in Russia, Spain, and Germany. In France and Italy, travelling groups of jesters performed plays featuring stylised characters in a form of theatre called the commedia dell'arte. A version of this passed into British folk tradition in the form of a puppet show, Punch and Judy. In France the tradition of the court jester ended with the abolition of the monarchy in the French Revolution.
In 2015, the town of Conwy in North Wales appointed Russel Erwood (aka Erwyd le Fol) as the official resident jester of the town and its people, a post that had been vacant since 1295.


=== Other countries ===

Poland's most famous court jester was Stańczyk (c. 1480–1560), whose jokes were usually related to political matters, and who later became a historical symbol for Poles.
In 2004 English Heritage appointed Nigel Roder ("Kester the Jester") as the State Jester for England, the first since Muckle John 355 years previously. However, following an objection by the National Guild of Jesters, English Heritage accepted they were not authorised to grant such a title. Roder was succeeded as "Heritage Jester" by Pete Cooper ("Peterkin the Fool").
In Germany, Till Eulenspiegel is a folkloric hero dating back to medieval times and ruling each year over Fasching or Carnival time, mocking politicians and public figures of power and authority with political satire like a modern-day court jester. He holds a mirror to make us aware of our times (Zeitgeist), and his sceptre, his "bauble", or marotte, is the symbol of his power.
In 17th century Spain, dwarves, often with deformities, were employed as buffoons to entertain the king and his family, especially the children. In Velázquez's painting Las Meninas two dwarfs are included: Maria Bárbola, a female dwarf from Germany with hydrocephalus, and Nicolasito Portusato from Italy. Mari Bárbola can also be seen in a later portrait of princess Margarita Teresa in mourning by Juan Bautista Martinez del Mazo. There are other paintings by Velázquez that include court dwarves such as Prince Balthasar Charles With a Dwarf.
During the Renaissance Papacy, the Papal court in Rome had a court jester, similar to the secular courts of the time. Pope Pius V dismissed the court Jester, and no later Pope employed one.
In Japan from the 13th to 18th centuries, the taikomochi, a kind of male geisha, attended the feudal lords (daimyōs). They entertained mostly through dancing and storytelling, and were at times counted on for strategic advice. By the 16th century they fought alongside their lord in battle in addition to their other duties. In Akira Kurosawa’s 1985 film Ran with Sengoku era setting, Kyoami is a Shakespearean fool character, the jester of Hidetora. He is inspired by the Fool in King Lear.
Tonga was the first royal court to appoint a court jester in the 20th century; Taufa'ahau Tupou IV, the King of Tonga, appointed JD Bogdanoff to that role in 1999. Bogdanoff was later embroiled in a financial scandal.
In many Sanskrit Indian texts like Abhijnanashakuntalam, Vidushakas are what we can call jesters. In Kamasutra, a Vidushaka, also known as a Vaihasaka, is defined as a beloved jester trusted by everyone. This character is somewhat skilled in the arts but is primarily known for provoking laughter. The Vidūṣaka is detailed in the Nāṭyaśāstra. In the theatres, his character is often depicted as dwarfish, hunch-backed, having large teeth and tawny eyes. He wears a makeup showing a shaven head or a crow's foot pattern imprint on his head. He is a clever confidant who observes and imitates all types of people, uses witty speech to reveal secrets that no one else dares to venture, delivers criticism to even kings through humor so that no one gets offended, maintains good relationship with women and entertains the court.
The root of the word "fool" is from the Latin follis, which means "bag of wind" or bellows or that which contains air or breath.


=== In fiction ===

The jester can be symbolic of common sense and of honesty, notably in King Lear, where the court jester is a character used for insight and advice on the part of the monarch, taking advantage of his licence to mock and speak freely to dispense frank observations and highlight the folly of his monarch. This presents a clashing irony as a greater man could dispense the same advice and find himself being detained in the dungeons or even executed. Only as the lowliest member of the court can the jester be the monarch's most useful adviser.
The Shakespearean fool is a recurring character type in the works of William Shakespeare. Shakespearean fools are usually clever peasants or commoners that use their wits to outdo people of higher social standing. In this sense, they are very similar to the real fools, and jesters of the time, but their characteristics are greatly heightened for theatrical effect. The "groundlings" (theatre-goers who were too poor to pay for seats and thus stood on the 'ground' in the front by the stage) that frequented the Globe Theatre were more likely to be drawn to these Shakespearean fools. However they were also favoured by the nobility. Most notably, Queen Elizabeth I was a great admirer of the popular actor who portrayed fools, Richard Tarlton. For Shakespeare himself, however, actor Robert Armin may have proved vital to the cultivation of the fool character in his many plays.


=== In tarot ===

In tarot, "The Fool" is a card of the Major Arcana. The tarot depiction of the Fool often shows a man (or less often, a woman) dressed in bright clothes and holding a white rose in one hand and a small bundle of possessions in the other, with a dog or cat at their heels. The fool is in the act of unknowingly walking off the edge of a cliff, precipice, or other high place.


== Modern usage ==


=== Buffoon ===

In a similar vein, a buffoon is someone who provides amusement through inappropriate appearance or behaviour. Originally the term was used to describe a ridiculous but amusing person. The term is now frequently used in a derogatory sense to describe someone considered foolish, or someone displaying inappropriately vulgar, bumbling or ridiculous behaviour which is a source of general amusement. The term originates from the old Italian "buffare", meaning to puff out one's cheeks that also applies to bouffon. Having swelled their cheeks they would slap them to expel the air and produce a noise which amused the spectators.


=== Carnival and medieval reenactment ===
During the Burgundian and the Rhenish carnival, cabaret performances in local dialect are held. In Brabant this person is called a "tonpraoter" or "sauwelaar", and is actually in or on a barrel. In Limburg they are named "buuttereedner" or "buutteredner" and in Zeeland they are called an "ouwoer". They all perform a cabaret speech in dialect, during which many current issues are reviewed. Often there are local situations and celebrities from local and regional politics who are mocked, ridiculed and insulted. The "Tonpraoter" or "Buuttereedner" may be considered successors of the jesters.


== Notable jesters ==


=== Historical ===
Triboulet (1479–1536), court jester of Kings Louis XII and Francis I of France
Stańczyk (c. 1480–1560), Polish jester
João de Sá Panasco (fl. 1524–1567), African court jester of King John III of Portugal, eventually elevated to gentleman courtier of the Royal Household and Knight of St. James
Jane Foole (c. 1543–1558), natural fool of Catherine Parr and Mary I of England
Will Sommers (died 1560), court jester of King Henry VIII of England
Chicot (c. 1540–1591), court jester of King Henry III of France
Mathurine de Vallois (fl. 1589 – fl. 1627), court jester of Henry III of France and Henry IV of France
Archibald Armstrong (died 1672), jester of King James I of England
Jeffrey Hudson (1619–c. 1682), "court dwarf" of Henrietta Maria of France
Jamie Fleeman (1713–1778), the Laird of Udny's Fool
Perkeo of Heidelberg, 18th century, jester of Prince Charles III Philip, Elector Palatine
Sebastian de Morra, (died 1649) court dwarf and jester to King Philip IV of Spain
Don Diego de Acedo, court dwarf and jester to Philip IV of Spain
Roulandus le Fartere, a medieval flatulist who lived in twelfth-century England


=== Modern-day jesters ===
Jesse Bogdonoff (b. 1955), former court jester and financial advisor to King Taufa'ahau Tupou IV of Tonga
Russel Erwood (b. 1981), known as Erwyd le Fol, is the 2nd official resident jester of Conwy in North Wales replacing the jester of 1295


=== Fictional jesters ===
Rigoletto – eponymous jester to the Duke of Mantua in Giuseppe Verdi's 1851 opera Rigoletto
Yorick – dead court jester in William Shakespeare's play Hamlet
Puck – court jester to the king of the fairies, Oberon in Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream
Jack Point – a 'strolling jester' in Gilbert and Sullivan's 1888 Savoy Opera, The Yeomen of the Guard
Nights – protagonist in the 1996 video game Nights into Dreams
Dimentio – antagonist in the 2007 video game Super Paper Mario
Jimbo – mascot in the indie game Balatro
Jevil – secret boss in Deltarune
Cicero – assassin jester from The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim
Patchface and Mushroom – court jesters from George R.R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire series and Fire and Blood respectively
Pomni – protagonist in the adult animated web series The Amazing Digital Circus
Per'kele - Antagonist in Fear And Hunger 2: Termina


== Gallery ==


== See also ==


== Footnotes ==


== References ==
Billington, Sandra A Social History of the Fool, The Harvester Press, 1984. ISBN 0-7108-0610-8
Doran, John A History of Court Fools, 1858
Hyers, M. Conrad, The Spirituality of Comedy: comic heroism in a tragic world 1996 Transaction Publishers ISBN 1-56000-218-2
McCusker, S. "Pedagogy of the Clown: Clowning Principles in Education." Springer Nature.2023.
Otto, Beatrice K., "Fools Are Everywhere: The Court Jester Around the World," Chicago University Press, 2001
Southworth, John, Fools and Jesters at the English Court, Sutton Publishing, 1998. ISBN 0-7509-1773-3
Swain, Barbara. "Fools and Folly During the Middle Ages and the Renaissance" Columbia University Press, 1932.
Welsford, Enid: The Fool : His Social and Literary History (out of print) (1935 + subsequent reprints): ISBN 1-299-14274-5
Janik, Vicki K. (ed.) (1998). Fools and Jesters in Literature, Art, and History: A Bio-bibliographical Sourcebook. Greenwood Publishing Group, USA. ISBN 0-313-29785-1.
 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Balatro". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities. London: John Murray. p. 183.


== External links ==

Fooling Around the World (A history of the court jester)
Foolish Clothing: Depictions of Jesters and Fools in the Middle Ages and Renaissance What 14th-16th century jesters wore and carried, as seen in illustrations and museum collections.
Costume (Jester Hat), ca. 1890-1920, in the Staten Island Historical Society Online Collection Database