Joseph Laniel (French: [ʒozɛf lanjɛl]; 12 October 1889 – 8 April 1975) was a French conservative politician of the French Fourth Republic, who served as Prime Minister for a year from 1953 to 1954. During the middle of his tenure as Prime Minister Laniel was an unsuccessful candidate for the French Presidency, a post won by René Coty.


== Biography ==
Laniel was born at Vimoutiers in Normandy to a family that ran a successful textile factory.
On 10 July 1940, he voted in favour of granting the cabinet presided by Marshal Philippe Pétain authority to draw up a new constitution, thereby effectively ending the French Third Republic and establishing Vichy France. However, he later joined the French Resistance and was one of the founders of the National Council of the Resistance (CNR).
Co-founder of the Republican Party of Liberty (PRL), then of the National Center of Independents and Peasants (CNIP), Laniel's cabinet was overturned after the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu in Indochina in 1954. He was succeeded by Pierre Mendès France.
During the First Indochina War, France under the Leadership of Laniel seek an armistice that was supported by United Kingdom and other countries.


== Laniel's Ministry, 28 June 1953 – 19 June 1954 ==
Joseph Laniel – President of the Council
Henri Queuille – Vice President of the Council
Paul Reynaud – Vice President of the Council
Pierre-Henri Teitgen – Vice President of the Council
Georges Bidault – Minister of Foreign Affairs
René Pleven – Minister of National Defense and Armed Forces
Léon Martinaud-Déplat – Minister of the Interior
Edgar Faure – Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs
Jean-Marie Louvel – Minister of Commerce and Industry
Paul Bacon – Minister of Labour and Social Security
Paul Ribeyre – Minister of Justice
André Marie – Minister of National Education
André Mutter – Minister of Veterans and War Victims
Louis Jacquinot – Minister of Overseas France
Jacques Chastellain – Minister of Public Works, Transport, and Tourism
Paule Coste-Floret – Minister of Public Health and Population
Maurice Lemaire – Minister of Reconstruction and Housing
Pierre Ferri – Minister of Posts
Edmond Barrachin – Minister of Constitutional Reform
Édouard Corniglion-Molinier – Minister of State
Changes

3 June 1954 – Édouard Frédéric-Dupont enters the ministry as Minister of Relations with Partner States.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Waite, J.D.A. (1 January 2005). "THE END OF THE FIRST INDOCHINA WAR: AN INTERNATIONAL HISTORY (UNITED STATES, FRANCE, GREAT BRITAIN)". Ohio University – via Google Scholar.