Aimlabs, formerly Aim Lab, is an aim-training shooter game released on June 16, 2023. It was developed and published by State Space Labs, Inc.. It allows players to practice and optimize their gameplay in a first or third-person shooter setting. It is available for Windows, Xbox, Android, and iOS operating systems.


== Gameplay ==
While players complete certain tasks in the game, it will gather information about accuracy and reaction time and offer feedback based on their performance. It can be adjusted to have the physics of certain games, and maps from those games are also available in the game.


== Development and release ==
Aimlabs, then called Aim Lab, was available in Steam early access starting February 7, 2018. A mobile versions of the game was released for iOS and Android on July 14, 2022, and the game was officially released on Windows on June 16, 2023, rebranding itself as Aimlabs. In the first two days of its full launch, it reached #1 on Steam's bestseller list and reached 30 million global players.
The game grew significantly during the COVID-19 pandemic. By September 2021, the game had 5 million monthly active users out of a 20 million total in comparison to 100,000 out of 1.5 million in March 2020.
In 2021, Ubisoft announced that Aimlabs became the official FPS training partner for Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six Siege. Riot Games followed in 2022, announcing the same with Valorant. It has also partnered with the Valorant Champions Tour and the Call of Duty League. Additionally, Aimlabs collaborated with neurotechnology company Kernel to use the game for studies on cerebral palsy and brain activity during games.
Aimlabs ventured into consoles in June 2024, when it became available on the Xbox. On November 4th, it became available for PlayStation 5.


== Reception ==
Emma Matthews of PC Gamer gave a positive review of Aimlabs, saying that the game effectively points out mistakes and allows the player to improve from them. By April 2023 the game broke its peak lifetime player count record with 10,724 concurrent players.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website