Angry Birds Transformers is a 2014 shoot 'em up video game and the tenth installment in the Angry Birds series. The game is a crossover between Angry Birds and the Transformers franchise, featuring battles between the Autobirds and Deceptihogs, Angry Birds' versions of the Autobots and Decepticons. It was published by Rovio Entertainment in collaboration with Hasbro, being released on October 15, 2014, for iOS, and was released for Android on October 30, 2014. The release includes related licensed merchandise and a toy line from Hasbro.


== Gameplay ==
The goal is to survive through the run, shooting at pigs, structures, and other targets as well as transforming into various types of vehicles (which all stay at ground level), since failure to survive results in no pigs popped and that character losing all health. Pigs can be eliminated by shooting directly at them or by destroying the structures or making TNT explode. Since it is a side-scrolling video game, pigs who have gone out of the screen can no longer be eliminated. The player can use the user's Facebook friends unlocked characters or randomly generated characters to assist in a level for a limited time.
Coins may be collected either during runs, by popping pigs, or simply by waiting and collecting coins that generate over time from freed areas. Some levels or features can be only unlocked when the player has upgraded enough Transformers. In addition, gems can also be collected and can be used to purchase and to keep going through a run or upgrade a Transformer instantly.


=== Telepods ===
The game is the fourth game in the Angry Birds franchise to be compatible with Telepods, a toys-to-life line that is also used in other Angry Birds games; Angry Birds Star Wars II (2013), Angry Birds Go! (2013), and Angry Birds Stella (2014). When using Telepods, it can summon the toy's Transformer and either boost its power or recharge its armour. It is necessary to scan the toy's QR code each time after the app is closed, since the application will reset the effects of Telepods upon startup.


== Plot ==
The EggSpark has crashed into the surface of Piggy Island, transforming the Birds and Pigs and turning them into the Transformers. It has also turned the eggs into the EggBots, which are turning all non-bipal pigs into their minions and then turning non-living things into monsters that want to destroy life, replacing it with technological beings across the island. The Autobirds and Deceptihogs must put their differences aside to destroy the transformed pigs and to chase the mischievous Eggbots, ultimately rescuing the fate of their homeland.


== Reception ==

Angry Birds Transformers has received generally positive reviews, with a Metacritic score of 70/100 based on 13 reviews. The Guardian praised that the game appeals to Transformers fans, while also providing more proof that the Angry Birds can fit neatly into new stories and game genres, while the downside there are timers of multiple hours to upgrade a character, however gems to upgrade instantly (slowly earned or purchased with real money) make the upgrade happen instantly.


== Other media ==
At SDCC 2014, IDW Publishing and Rovio announced an Angry Birds Transformers crossover comic books series; it was written by John Barber and art by Marcelo Ferreira and published in early 2015 as a four issue mini-series.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website