Bad Piggies is a 2012 puzzle video game developed by Rovio Entertainment, and was the company's first spin-off in the Angry Birds series. The game launched on Android, iOS, Windows, and Mac on September 27, 2012. It was released for BlackBerry 10 in October 2013 and for Windows Phone in April 2014. Unlike the Angry Birds games, the player assists the pigs in building vehicles that travel on land and in air to collect pieces of a map to ultimately capture and take away the birds' eggs. As of October 2012, Bad Piggies was the fastest-selling game on the Apple App Store, and the quickest one to reach the top of the app list in just three hours.
In June 2014, Rovio made Bad Piggies free-to-play, since it previously had a purchase price. Advertisements were also implemented.
Between April 2019 and July 2019, the game was removed from the Google Play Store and iOS App Store respectively. However, in early 2020, the game was listed again worldwide.
In May 2023, a sequel titled Bad Piggies 2 was soft launched on iOS and Android devices, but was later discontinued at the end of October that same year.


== Gameplay ==

The main objective of Bad Piggies is to create a contraption out of the materials provided, using it to reach a goal at the end of the level. The parts that are given vary in abilities and quality, some requiring manually launching the part, such as rockets and soda bottles, and others requiring the use of motors to run automatically. As the game obeys the laws of gravity due to being physics-based, parts can break upon force and some are heavier than others. Certain parts, such as metal as opposed to wood, have stronger durability and can withstand bigger impacts and collisions. The player may also use power-ups if having difficulty completing the level, giving perks such as making the vehicle faster, making parts more durable, or a mechanic pig that will build a contraption for the player.
Although it is required to reach the end goal to move on to the next level, there are two optional hindrances and collectibles that are required to fully complete a level and get three stars; these range from collecting "star boxes" in varying locations, completing the level with a time limit, contraption limitations such as not using specific parts, escorting King Pig to the goal, or completing the level without the machine breaking.
Levels are organized into sections, each covering specific parts to use in the contraptions. Apart from regular levels, there are other additional modes; sandbox levels don't have specific goals and are one large level, filled with twenty or forty star boxes that could be collected. The sandbox levels give more parts than usual and a wider build area to build larger contraptions. The "Road Hogs" episode has longer levels with the objective of creating the fastest vehicle possible. Another additional mode is the "Cake Race" mode; the player is put against a computer opponent, competing to collect up to five cupcakes that are scattered throughout the level. Points are awarded after collecting as many as possible in the time limit and are determined by how quickly they were obtained, the player's current level, and the winner is awarded a random type of crate that can only be opened after a certain amount of time.
Daily, three loot crates can be found in random levels. When collected, the player is awarded items and power-ups, sometimes even customisable skins for the parts. There is also the chance of earning scraps, which can be used to unlock a random customized part. Crates vary in the rewards given and are based on what type of crate it is, such as cardboard paper, glass, wood, silver, bronze, marble, or gold.


== Reception ==

The iOS version of Bad Piggies received "generally favorable" reviews from critics, according to the review aggregation website Metacritic.
Mark Brown of Pocket Gamer gave the game a Silver Award and called it "creative, addictive, and absolutely packed with content," while lamenting that it felt "a little too safe and predictable." IGN rated it the best mobile game of 2012.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website