Boatsetter is an American online platform that provides boat rentals. It is based in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Boatsetter's online platform comprises over 50,000 boat listings. It connects boat owners, renters, and captains across 700 distinct locations, spanning the Caribbean, Europe, Mexico, and the United States.


== History ==
Boatsetter was originally founded in 2014 by Andrew Sturner. In 2015, Boatsetter and Cruzin, originally founded by Jaclyn Baumgarten, merged into one entity and adopted the name Boatsetter.
In August 2017, Boatsetter acquired its rival boat-sharing platform, Boatbound. Founded in 2013, Boatbound was based in Seattle, Washington. It was often described as Airbnb for boats.
In November 2017, Boatsetter relocated from Aventura, merging its Delray Beach and Seattle teams into a new 3,200-square foot headquarters situated in downtown Fort Lauderdale. The relocation allowed the company to participate in the Fort Lauderdale International Boat Show, providing a platform to exhibit its services to almost 3,000 charter operators attending the event via an open house.
In August 2019, Boatsetter received a Series A investment of $10 million. Previously, it raised $13 million in Series A funding in December 2016.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Boatsetter experienced a surge in demand for safe outdoor activities. This led to a 200 percent annual rise in bookings by July, predominantly due to an uptick in multi-day reservations, with the emerging trend of staycations also contributing significantly.
In May 2021, Boatsetter expanded its operations by acquiring Fisher Guiding, a New York-based fishing charter marketplace. The acquisition expanded Boatsetter Fishing service, providing user access to fishing boat charters, guides, and outfitters, thereby increasing the accessibility of angling experiences.
In August 2022, Boatsetter received $38 million in a series B funding.
In January 2023, Michael Farb became the chief executive officer (CEO) of the company, succeeding Jaclyn Baumgarten who was the CEO since 2014.


== Platform ==
Boatsetter is a peer-to-peer boat rental platform. 
Before onboarding, Boatsetter implements a pre-screening test for all potential renters to assure adherence to insurance, safety guidelines, and specific boat-owner criteria. The platform allows qualifying individuals the option to rent boats without the necessity of a licensed captain.
It is customary for boat owners associated with Boatsetter to provide rental services for their vessels on a half-day, full-day, or longer customized charter periods. The platform facilitates boat rentals, particularly vessels measuring between 28 and 60 feet, irrespective of user boating proficiency. Additionally, the platform offers an optional service to pair renters with professional captains, licensed by the U.S. Coast Guard. The rental price is determined by the boat owners, while Boatsetter accrues 20 percent of the rental fee as commission. Through another service called Boatsetter Lux Charters, it provides luxury boats and yachts for rent.
Boatsetter has been described as Airbnb for boats. The platform can be accessed through a mobile app.


== See also ==
Click and Boat
Sailo


== References ==