Diane Farr (born September 7, 1969) is an American actress, producer, and author. Her television roles have included FBI agent Megan Reeves in Numb3rs, the firefighter Laura Miles in Rescue Me, and the division chief Sharon Leone in Fire Country.


== Life and career ==
Farr was born in New York City. She is of Irish and Italian descent. She modeled as an adolescent, and at the age of 19, became the youngest person to be crowned "Miss New York". Farr studied drama at New York's Stony Brook University, with semesters at Loughborough University in England, graduating magna cum laude with a joint BA in Theatre from the two universities.
Farr has written two books. The first, The Girl Code, was published in 2001 and has been translated into seven languages. It discusses the secret language of single women. Her second book, Kissing Outside the Lines, was published in May 2011 and is a comical memoir of her path to an interracial marriage. Farr also writes for a number of American magazines and has an internationally syndicated newspaper column for the International Herald Tribune.
Farr was a co-host for 200 episodes of the advice program Loveline on MTV and made guest appearances on The Drew Carey Show, Arli$$, and CSI. She portrayed the recurring role of Amy DeLuca, mother to the series co-star Majandra Delfino's character Maria, on The WB's and later UPN's Roswell. She also played Maddie Hudson on The WB's Like Family. Later, she played Detective Jan Fendrich on the ABC series The Job, co-created by and starring Denis Leary. Following the end of that series, she appeared in the cast of Rescue Me (also co-created by and starring Leary), playing a firefighter for two seasons. She left Rescue Me to star as FBI agent Megan Reeves on the CBS crime drama Numb3rs.
Farr opted not to renew her contract and left Numb3rs following the show's fourth season. She starred in her final episode on May 18, 2008.  Farr then joined  the Showtime series Californication for a 10-episode run in autumn 2009.
In April 2010, Farr had a role as Barbara, a mother whose negative influence led her son Eddie to become a serial killer, in a flashback episode of Desperate Housewives. When Barbara discovered Eddie's collection of newspaper articles about the women he hurt or murdered, he strangled her to death. She guest-starred in White Collar as a waitress named Gina De Stefano.
Farr guest-starred in season seven of Grey's Anatomy, where in episode 130, she played the role of a patient with Huntington's disease under the care of Meredith, played by the series star Ellen Pompeo. She also had a recurring role in the final season (2012–13) of the Grey's Anatomy spin-off series, Private Practice, as Miranda, a terminal cancer patient and the love interest of Dr. Sheldon Wallace (Brian Benben).
For several years starting in 2010, Farr wrote, directed, and presented a reality comedy series for Funny or Die  called AssCastles.
In Adam Carolla's 2015 film Road Hard, Farr starred as his character's love interest.
Currently, Farr stars as Sharon Leone, Cal Fire Division Chief and mother of lead character Bode Donovan, in Jerry Bruckheimer's 2022 American drama television series, Fire Country.


== Personal life ==
On June 24, 2006, then-36-year-old Farr married 35-year-old entertainment marketing executive Seung Yong Chung, at a ceremony in Mammoth Lakes, California. Their first child was a son, and they later had twin daughters. The couple divorced in 2017, though the relationship remains amicable and the family congregated together during the COVID-19 lockdowns in 2020.
Farr has served as an ambassador to the Mineseeker Foundation and the Sole for African Child Foundation.


== Filmography ==


=== Partial Film ===


=== Television ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Diane Farr at IMDb