Fire Emblem Shadows is a 2025 social deduction strategy video game developed by Intelligent Systems and published by Nintendo for Android and iOS. It is the second mobile spin-off of the Fire Emblem series following Fire Emblem Heroes (2017). Unlike Heroes, the game forgoes the series' traditional tactical role-playing gameplay in favor of multiplayer social deduction. Players engage in combat where one of their number is secretly a traitor who can sabotage others. After combat's completion, players vote on who they think is the traitor and subsequently must fight the traitor afterwards. The game features an in-game story split in two halves; the light half focuses on Kurt, a royal who is forced to flee her home country after it is attacked by the Goddess of Shadows, Fenris, while the dark half focuses on servants of both Fenris and the Light Goddess Naga as they engage in combat with each other.
The game was announced and released on September 25, 2025. The game received negative reviews from critics, who felt the gameplay was simple and lacked depth in terms of its social deduction gameplay.


== Gameplay and plot ==


=== Gameplay ===
A first in the series, Shadows features real time strategy gameplay with social deduction elements. In online multiplayer battles, three players work together against a series of enemies, with one player secretly serving the Goddess of Shadows, Fenris; this player can attack and sabotage their allies. Combat is automatic, with characters moving on their own; players can control when they use magic and healing abilities. Players can adjust the skills and weapons they use outside of combat. Each game is split into two rounds; in the first, losing is impossible, and players may do whatever they wish to convince or demonstrate to the others that they are not the traitor. After combat, players must vote on who they believe is the Fenris-aligned player; if players associated with the light guess correctly, they receive additional revivals, allowing a player's character to heal themselves if they are defeated. Once the traitor is revealed, they transform into an animalistic version of themselves based on a particular trait present on their body. Players then must fight the traitor in combat during the second round; whichever side prevails in combat wins the game.


=== Plot ===

The game is split into parallel light and shadow stories that are told in short, visual novel-style chapters and grouped into episodes known as Books. The player can unlock chapters by playing multiplayer battles.
In the first chapter of the light story, Kurt, the prince of the Kingdom of Ast, flees the country after it is invaded by servants of Fenris. Kurt, actually a woman who is hiding her gender due to a lack of male heirs, and her retainers and allies, seek to flee to the neighboring kingdom of Holtz, where Kurt's fiancee, Rose, will grant them safety. Throughout the journey, Kurt and her allies are pursued by servants of Fenris, led by the siblings Hati and Skoll. Skoll appears to kill Kurt after she refuses to make a dark pact, though Kurt believes this to have been a nightmare. The group realizes that a traitor is feeding information to Fenris; Gotthold, one of Kurt's retainers, makes a verbal slip, and subsequently admits his betrayal, having made a pact to secretly save Kurt's life following Skoll's attack, which was not in fact a dream. Commanded to kill Kurt, Gotthold manages to defy the order and retain his free will, though this causes him to perish as punishment for breaking the pact. The group subsequently makes it to Holtz. The second chapter of the light story focuses on the character Joachim, a boy who has the blood of Fenris inside of him and lives in a village with disciples of Naga. Joachim's village is destroyed by servants of Fenris, and Hati and Skoll approach him. Joachim initially rejects their offer, but in an attempt to protect his friends, ends up giving in and joining Fenris's side. Erma and Yuni, two servants of Naga, reunite Joachim with his friends, with Yuni revealing one of them is serving Fenris; she intends to kill whoever the traitor is.
In the first chapter's shadow story, servants of the Light Goddess Naga, Sai and Shea, encounter an amnesiac woman named Lyn, who they believe was summoned to help them fight Fenris, while Hati and Skoll recruit others to their side. Sai, Shea, and Lyn encounter Hati and Skoll, who have recruited another amnesiac named Dimitri, who proceeds to fight Lyn. In the second chapter's shadow story, the forces of Fenris plan their attack on the village while Erma and Yuni investigate following their attack. 


== Release and reception ==


=== Release ===
Fire Emblem Shadows was revealed and immediately released on September 25, 2025 in over 70 countries on multiple devices, including iOS and Android. Barring licensed releases, it was the first mobile game to be released by Nintendo in six years since the 2019 release of Mario Kart Tour. It is the second Fire Emblem game released on mobile, following the 2017 release of Fire Emblem Heroes. Shadows was developed by Intelligent Systems in conjunction with the company DeNA.
The game uses a free to play model. Unlike Heroes, a gacha game, Shadows uses microtransactions, including a season pass, which allowed players to unlock returning character Lyn until October 28. Following the release of Shadows, the game's incarnation of Lyn was added to Heroes, which caused the latter game to experience a surge in revenue. Returning character Corrin was later added as the second season pass's character in late October 2025.


=== Critical reception ===

The game received "generally unfavorable" reviews according to review aggregator website Metacritic, achieving a score of 37/100 based on 5 reviews. Hayes Madsen, writing for Inverse, criticized the game as being "too simple", feeling it would not be very appealing to players after a few rounds of gameplay. Polygon's Giovanni Colantonio also felt the gameplay lacked depth, particularly in terms of the social elements of the game, additionally criticizing the microtransactions in the game, as players who bought stronger gear could simply overwhelm other players even if they do not engage with the social elements. The game was noted by critics as having a gameplay style resembling the 2018 social deduction game Among Us.
GameSpot's Cameron Koch felt the game went by too quickly for the social deduction aspects to be incorporated effectively, and that microtransactions allowed players to brute force their way into victory regardless of their success in social deduction. Though Koch highlighted the game's character designs and story, feeling that they were effective elements, he noted the fact that they were locked beyond gameplay that he felt was boring. Nintendo Life's PJ O'Reilly also found that the gameplay was boring, and that the story was rigid and basic in addition to the overly slow gameplay pace. Lorenzo Kobe Fazio, writing for Multiplayer.it, criticized the lack of a strong story and the fast-paced gameplay, which he felt resulted in a lack of strong interest for the former and the social deduction gameplay being considerably less effective, respectively. He did, however, positively highlight the game's graphics.


=== Revenue ===
In the game's first week, the game made $90,000 USD in revenue, a decrease from previous Fire Emblem mobile game Heroes, which made over $400,000 USD in its first week. Over half of Shadows's revenue hails from Japanese players, with 32% hailing from players in the United States and only 1% hailing from Canada. In its first month, it made $200,000 USD in revenue, with spending for the game peaking one day after its release and steadily declining from there.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website