Flo is a period-tracking app that provides menstrual cycle and ovulation tracking as well as pregnancy tracking that was developed by Flo Health, Inc. It has over 380 million downloads worldwide and over 70 million monthly active users as of November 2024.
In mid-2024, it reached unicorn status, and became Europe’s first femtech unicorn. The company has been accused of sharing users' sensitive health data with third parties without consent and misleading its users about data practices.


== History ==
Flo Health, Inc. was co-founded in 2015 by Dmitry and Yuri Gurski, in Belarus. Their backgrounds helped build the first version of the software having experience in other fitness and health apps. Dmitry serves as the company's CEO. The company's development hubs are in London, Amsterdam and Vilnius. 
In 2016, the company raised $1 million in seed round funding from Flint Capital and Haxus Venture Fund. In 2017, Flo received an investment of $5 million from Flint Capital and model Natalia Vodianova with Vodianova helping develop an awareness campaign for the company. In 2018, Flo received an investment of $6 million from Mangrove Capital Partners, with participation from Flint Capital and Haxus, giving the company a valuation of $200 million. In mid-2019, Flo received an additional investment of $7.5 million led by Founders Fund. In early September 2021, Flo announced it closed $50M in a Series B financing, bringing the total capital raised to $65 million and company valuation to $800M led by VNV Global and Target Global. In July 2024, Flo announced it raised more than $200M in Series C financing from General Atlantic bringing its valuation beyond $1 billion.
In September 2022, as a response to Roe v. Wade being overturned, Flo sped up the release of a feature called "Anonymous Mode". Flo said this mode allows users to access the app without any personal identifiers such as name, email address, or technical identifiers being associated with their health data. Flo said it uses a technology called Oblivious HTTP to help protect user privacy in Anonymous Mode.
As of November 2024, the app had over 380 million downloads world wide, and over 70 million monthly active users.
In 2025, Flo adopted a data intelligence platform from Databricks to power its analytics and AI features, allowing users personalized cycle predictions.


== Application and features ==
Flo was initially created as a period and ovulation tracking application. It now provides reminders of upcoming menstrual cycles and a place to record various other health symptoms such as contraceptive methods, vaginal discharge (leukorrhea), water intake, pains, mood swings, and sexual activity. The application is available on iOS and Android.
Flo is free to download and the free basic version gives you access to period and ovulation tracking and predictions, symptom tracking, cycle history, and anonymous mode.
In Pregnancy mode, the app provides tracking features and educational material for pregnancy.
In October 2023, Flo launched Flo for Partners, a feature that allows users to share their Flo data with their partner.


== Privacy and security issues ==
In February 2019, it was alleged in reports that Flo had been sending users' health data to Facebook without users' informed consent, and in violation of Facebook's developer policies. While Flo claimed it had never shared data with Facebook, it promised to stop data sharing and removed Facebook SDK from the application. It filed the request to delete all user data from Facebook Analytics and released an app update. 
In September 2019, Privacy International published a report regarding data sharing for a number of period-tracking apps documenting how Flo exposed its users sensitive health data.
In response to the allegations of private data misuse, a complaint was filed against Flo Health, Inc by the Federal Trade Commission alleging that it had lied to its users about its privacy and data practices. According to the FTC complaint, beginning in 2016, Flo had handed users' health information to "numerous third parties" including Google, Facebook, AppsFlyer, and Flurry and "took no action to limit what these companies could do with users' information".
In 2021, Flo reached a settlement with the FTC in which it promised to stop misleading users about its data-handling practices and obtain users' consent before sharing their health details. The agreement also required that Flo to undertake an independent privacy audit which it completed in March 2022.
In March 2024, the Supreme Court of British Columbia certified a class action suit against Flo for sharing intimate data with Facebook and other third parties without user knowledge.
In 2025, the court approved a settlement agreement resolving the lawsuit. Under the settlement terms, Flo Health agreed to pay $8 million as part of a combined settlement totaling approximately $56.5 million, with Google and its analytics subsidiary Flurry contributing an additional $48.5 million.
The settlement provided compensation to affected users and required Flo Health to maintain enhanced data privacy practices. The official settlement website provides detailed information for class members regarding eligibility and claims procedures.


== Recognition ==
Flo was named to Bloomberg’s Top 25 UK Startups to Watch for 2024. 
Flo's Anonymous Mode feature was recognized on both Fast Company's World Changing Ideas 2023 and TIME's Best Inventions List 2023.
Flo is a CES 2019 Innovation Awards Honoree in the Software and Mobile Applications category.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website