Goran Višnjić (Croatian: [ɡǒran ʋîʃɲitɕ] VISH-nyich; born 9 September 1972) is a Croatian actor.  He is best known for his roles as Dr. Luka Kovač in ER and Garcia Flynn in Timeless, both NBC television series. For ER, he and the cast were nominated for two Screen Actors Guild Awards.


== Early life ==
Višnjić was born on 9 September 1972 in Šibenik, SR Croatia, SFR Yugoslavia. He has one sibling, an elder brother, Joško. His father, Željko, was a bus driver, and his mother, Milka, worked in a market. He appeared in plays throughout his childhood and made his screen debut at the age of 16 in the controversial Yugoslav film, Braća po materi (1988), playing a young Ustaša.
In 1990, at the age of 18, Višnjić served one-year of obligatory military service in the Yugoslav People's Army as a paratrooper. Only weeks after his military discharge in 1991, as Yugoslavia began to dissolve, he joined the nascent Croatian Ground Army. After leaving the army, he moved to Zagreb to study at the Academy of Dramatic Art.


== Career ==


=== 1981–1995: Beginnings ===
Višnjić began acting at his hometown of Šibenik, where he was performing at local theatre. He later expressed that that's the way he got drawn into it; "I just started there as a kid; there was no money involved, no fame. It was just like a big playground". In 1991, Višnjić subsequently had to fight at Croatian War of Independence. In 1992, after finishing his service at 20, he returned to acting and attended the Academy of Dramatic Arts in the capital of Zagreb. Višnjić was the youngest actor to be chosen for the title role in Shakespeare's Hamlet at the Dubrovnik Summer Festival. Originally cast as Laertes and understudy to Hamlet, he took over the role when the star dropped out of the production shortly before the first performance. During an episode of ER, he demonstrated his expertise in the part of Hamlet, by reciting an excerpt from the "To be, or not to be" soliloquy in Croatian. He portrayed the doomed prince from 1994 to 2000, winning three national awards. 


=== 1995–2005: ER and move to America ===
Višnjić starred as Prince Hamlet for seven years, often playing at Croatian National Theatre in Zagreb. He had opportunity to be a supporting actor for 1997 blockbuster drama film Welcome to Sarajevo which was filmed in Sarajevo during Bosnian War, starring opposite; Stephen Dillane, Woody Harrelson and Marisa Tomei. He portrayed Bosnian cab driver Risto Bavić. His performance caught the eye of talent agent Elyse Scherz at the Cannes Film Festival, who contacted Višnjić, and offered him employment in USA. He also appeared in 1997 American political action thriller film The Peacemaker, alongside George Clooney and Nicole Kidman. After doing publicity and press for Welcome to Sarajevo in USA, he got introduced to Griffin Dunne, who offered him an audition for his upcoming romantic fantasy film Practical Magic starring Sandra Bullock and Nicole Kidman. Practical Magic was released on October 16, 1998, grossing $68.3 million worldwide against a $75 million budget, becoming Višnjić's big breakthrough.
Subsequently, he found work in local television productions and landed a Tuborg beer commercial that aired in Europe. After flying from Croatia and America back-and-forth, he decided to move to USA and continue his career. 
In 1998, Višnjić got offered a role as a doctor Luka Kovač for TV medical series ER. It was his role as Risto, the Bosnian driver in Welcome to Sarajevo that led then-producer John Wells to offer him a role as a doctor to replace the departing George Clooney in the sixth season of ER in late 1999, eventually becoming the show's male lead by the start of season 12, having taken over from the departing star Noah Wyle, who left after the finale of season 11. By season 14, however, he was only making a limited number of appearances, before completely leaving the show early in season 15. In 1998, he appeared in Madonna's music video "The Power of Good-Bye," from her seventh studio album Ray of Light. She contacted him after seeing his performance in the film Welcome to Sarajevo. Calling him "the sexiest male working today", Madonna explained that "[she] was looking for an actor to be in [the] video and his face came right into my head". The video premiered on MTV on September 10, 1998, which further helped Višnjić's career. As of 2025, the music video gained more than 96 million views on Madonna's YouTube channel. He also had a cameo in the film Rounders, and small speaking role in Committed. 
While starring on ER, Višnjić worked on other projects. He co-starred in The Deep End; starred in and co-produced Posljednja volja; voiced Soto in 2002 animated film Ice Age, which was a box office success and grossed over $383.2 million, making it the eighth highest-grossing film of 2002 and the highest-grossing animated film of 2002. He starred in Close Your Eyes, alongside Shirley Henderson and Miranda Otto. In 2004, he starred in the television miniseries Spartacus and the film Duga mračna noć. He next appeared with Jennifer Garner in Elektra. In 2005, Višnjić was one of the four finalists for the role of James Bond, eventually losing out to British actor Daniel Craig, with whom he would appear in The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo directed by David Fincher.


=== 2005–2015: Continued success ===

In 2009, Višnjić appeared alongside Carla Gugino in a segment of the film New York, I Love You, an anthology set in New York. Višnjić's segment Apocrypha was directed by Andrey Zvyagintsev. The segment was cut from the theatrical release of the film but was included in the DVD version. He next starred in Helen, alongside Ashley Judd as Judd's character's husband David, which made its world premiere at the Sundance Film Festival.
Višnjić appeared in The Courageous Heart of Irena Sendler, about a young Polish woman who saved the lives of many Jewish children in wartime Warsaw, filmed in Riga, Latvia. It was produced for Hallmark Hall of Fame and aired on CBS on 19 April 2009. He completed a role in Mike Mills' film, Beginners. In late 2009, he was cast as Samson in The Deep, shown on BBC One in 2010.
He appeared as Andrija Hebrang in the television miniseries Tito. He later appeared in the unsold pilot of ABC's Boston's Finest, playing a disgraced cop who works with a female officer to solve crimes while trying to clear his name. He also appeared in the two-episode season three finale of the television series Leverage, as international crime financier Damien Moreau, his first guest appearance on an English-language television program.
In 2011, he played Dragan Armansky, the head of a security agency, in English language version of The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo directed by David Fincher, starring opposite Daniel Craig,  Rooney Mara, and Stellan Skarsgård . He has signed on to play this role for the entire film trilogy produced and distributed by Sony Pictures Entertainment. He was featured on a four-episode arc of the television series Pan Am; he played a Yugoslavian attaché to the United Nations.
In 2014, Višnjić played John Woods, the husband of Molly Woods, in Extant, produced by Steven Spielberg. Although the series was renewed in late 2014, he left the series early in the second season.

From 2016 to 2018, he played former NSA asset Garcia Flynn in NBC's Timeless.
In 2019, Višnjić portrayed Ante Gotovina in the Antun Vrdoljak-directed film General. His performance, along with the film itself gained overwhelmingly negative reviews with many critics, including Milivoj Jukić and Jurica Pavičić calling his portrayal "the worst performance of his career." The critically and commercially panned film was screened at the Pula Film Festival.
Višnjić played Nikola Tesla in the twelfth series of Doctor Who, appearing in the fourth episode, "Nikola Tesla's Night of Terror," first broadcast on 19 January 2020.
In early 2020, Višnjić was cast as Count Dracula in the unsold ABC pilot The Brides, which was written by Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa.
In 2024, Višnjić returned to the stage starring opposite Zrinka Cvitešić and Goran Grgić in Ivo Vojnović's Ekvinocijo, directed by Krešimir Dolenčić at the Dubrovnik Summer Festival. He also appeared in the final season of Vikings: Valhalla as Erik the Red.


== Recognition ==
Višnjić was named People's Sexiest Import in 1999 and "One of TV's Sexiest Men" in the June 5–11, 2005 TV Guide. He was ranked #18 in Hollywood in Best Croatian Male Movie Stars of All Time list in November 2005. He was also named as the Best Croatian Actor in 2004 for his role in the movie Duga mračna noć, according to the votes of Večernji list.


== Personal life ==
His wife, Eva (born Ivana Vrdoljak) is an artist and sculptor, and the daughter of film director Antun Vrdoljak, who controversially headed Croatian Radiotelevision from 1991 to 1995. The couple have two adopted children and one biological child. They resided in Los Angeles, California until 2021, and have three homes in Croatia – Zagreb, Šibenik and Dubrovnik. Višnjić acknowledged paternity of a daughter, Lana Lourdes Rupić, whom he fathered in 2006 with a Croatian woman, Mirela Rupić. In 2021, Višnjić and his family moved from Los Angeles to Cornwall, England.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Music videos ===


=== Web series ===


== Theatre ==


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Goran Višnjić on Instagram
Goran Višnjić on Twitter
Goran Višnjić at IMDb