Halil Özşan, known professionally as Hal Ozsan, (; born 26 October 1976) is a Turkish Cypriot-American actor, screenwriter and producer. As an actor, he came to prominence for his role as Todd Carr in Dawson's Creek. He has gone on to appear in various series regular and recurring roles on shows such as  Jessica Jones, NCIS: New Orleans, The Blacklist, Graceland, Impastor, 90210, and Kyle XY.
As a screenwriter and producer, he is known for being co-executive producer and co-writer of the Viceland comedy What Would Diplo Do? starring his Dawson's Creek co-star James Van Der Beek.
Ozsan fronted the band Poets and Pornstars as a singer-songwriter until 2008, with his music featured in such media as Californication and So You Think You Can Dance.


== Early life ==
Ozsan was born to Turkish Cypriot parents in Famagusta, Cyprus. At the age of three, he moved to England with his family and was raised in the London suburb of Havering. At the age of 11, he gained admission to Brentwood School, receiving a distinction for drama.


== Career ==
Ozsan moved to the United States in the 1990s, where he began working in films and television. His first major recognition for a recurring role was as Todd Carr in Dawson's Creek, followed by a main role in the miniseries Fallen and a recurring role in Kyle XY. Ozsan's first film appearance was in the film S1m0ne. He was the singer-songwriter for the rock band Poets and Pornstars; in 2008, he left the band to return to acting full-time. His songs have appeared in several films and television shows, including Californication, So You Think You Can Dance, Little Athens and Undead or Alive. Many other television shows and films were to follow.
In 2017, he became the co-executive producer and co-writer of the critically acclaimed Viceland comedy series What Would Diplo Do?, reuniting with his Dawson's Creek co-star James Van Der Beek.


== Personal life ==
On 16 October 2020, Ozsan eloped with makeup artist and hair stylist Ashley Kucich. Ozsan filed for divorce in 2021.
In July 2023, Ozsan announced that he was engaged to former fashion model Sarah Canning, to whom he proposed with the aid of British comedian David Walliams at the Mediterranean Film Festival. Ozsan and Canning had been dating since 2022.
They were married on 14 December 2023 in the Marylebone neighborhood of London.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Hal Ozsan at IMDb