Kathryn Marie Hahn (born July 23, 1973) is an American actress. She gained prominence appearing as a supporting actress in a number of comedy films, including How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days (2003), Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy (2004), Step Brothers (2008), Our Idiot Brother (2011), We're the Millers, The Secret Life of Walter Mitty (both 2013), and Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery (2022).
As a lead actress in film, Hahn has starred in Joey Soloway's comedy-drama Afternoon Delight (2013), the comedy film Bad Moms (2016) and its sequel A Bad Moms Christmas (2017), and Tamara Jenkins's drama Private Life (2018). Hahn voiced Ericka Van Helsing in two films of the Hotel Transylvania franchise (2018–2022) and Doctor Octopus in Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse (2018). She joined the Marvel Cinematic Universe portraying Agatha Harkness in the Disney+ limited series WandaVision (2021), and the spin-off Agatha All Along (2024). The role earned her Primetime Emmy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations.
Hahn also earned Emmy award nominations for portraying a rabbi in the Amazon series Transparent (2014–2019), a writer turned popular columnist in the Hulu series Tiny Beautiful Things (2023), and a film studio's head of marketing in Apple TV+ comedy series The Studio (2025–). She also acted in the NBC sitcom Parks and Recreation (2012–2015), the Amazon Video series I Love Dick (2016–2017), the HBO miniseries Mrs. Fletcher (2019) and I Know This Much Is True (2020), and the Apple TV+ dark comedy series The Shrink Next Door (2021).


== Early life and education ==
Kathryn Marie Hahn was born in Westchester, Illinois, the daughter of Karen Bunker and Bill Hahn. Hahn is of German, Irish, and English descent. She grew up in Cleveland Heights, Ohio, and was raised in the Catholic faith.  She attended St. Ann School  and Beaumont School, both located in Cleveland Heights. Hahn then attended Northwestern University, where she obtained a BA in theater. Afterward, she earned her MFA in drama from Yale University, where she starred as Sally Bowles in Cabaret and as Célimène in Molière's play, The Misanthrope. While auditioning for roles in her early twenties, Hahn worked as a receptionist and a waitress. Prior to pursuing a career in film and television, Hahn had extensive stage experience. She appeared with the Huntington Theater Company's productions of Jon Robin Baitz's Ten Unknowns and Sidney Kingsley's Dead End, and had parts in the Williamstown Theatre Festival's productions of William Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream and Hamlet, John Guare's Chaucer in Rome, and Henrik Ibsen's Hedda Gabler.
In 2024, Kathryn Hahn delivered the commencement address to Northwestern University’s graduating class and received an honorary Doctor of Arts degree.


== Career ==


=== 1999–2012: Early work ===
Hahn's first appearance on television was in Hickory Hideout, a local puppet show for children for then-NBC owned-and-operated station WKYC in Cleveland. While attending a festival, she was introduced to creator-producer Tim Kring. Hahn impressed Kring so favorably that he created the character of Lily Lebowski in Crossing Jordan specifically for her. The series aired from 2001 to 2007. Hahn has said of meeting Kring, "NBC and Tim Kring took a huge leap of faith in casting me. To be worked into a show that was in production and on the schedule is an amazing stroke of luck." On October 21, 2008, TV Guide reported that Hahn had signed a talent holding deal with Fox.
In 2003, Hahn appeared in a supporting role in the romantic comedy film How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days. The following year she appeared in Win a Date with Tad Hamilton!, Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy, Around the Bend, and Wake Up, Ron Burgundy: The Lost Movie. She later had more supporting roles in films, including the 2005 romantic comedy-drama A Lot like Love; The Holiday (2006); the science fiction adventure drama The Last Mimzy (2007); Step Brothers (2008); Revolutionary Road (2008); The Goods: Live Hard, Sell Hard (2009), How Do You Know (2010), Our Idiot Brother (2011), and Wanderlust (2012). In 2008, she made her Broadway theatre debut in the revival of the comedy Boeing-Boeing. She starred as Gloria, an American fiancée and airline stewardess. In 2009, she was cast as Eddy in a proposed American remake of the British TV series Absolutely Fabulous. A pilot was filmed but it was not picked up to series.
On television, Hahn starred in the short-lived NBC comedy series Free Agents, a 2011 remake of the British series of the same name. She had recurring roles on HBO shows Hung and Girls. From 2012 to 2015, she received praise for her recurring role on the NBC comedy series Parks and Recreation as Jennifer Barkley, the campaign manager of Leslie Knope's (Amy Poehler) opponent Bobby Newport (Paul Rudd). She received a 2012 Critics' Choice Television Award nomination for Best Guest Performer in a Comedy Series for her performance in Parks and Recreation.


=== 2013–2017: Film and television breakthrough ===

In 2013, Hahn played her first leading role, in the comedy-drama film Afternoon Delight, which was written and directed by Joey Soloway. The film premiered at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival. For her role, she was nominated for the Gotham Independent Film Award for Breakthrough Actor. Later that year, Hahn appeared in the box-office hit We're the Millers, and co-starred in The Secret Life of Walter Mitty. In 2014 she starred in the comedy film Bad Words, and the ensemble comedy-drama film This Is Where I Leave You.
In 2014, Hahn was cast as Rabbi Raquel Fein in the Amazon Studios critically acclaimed dark comedy-drama Transparent, whose creator, Joey Soloway, had directed her in Afternoon Delight. She received an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series (2017) as well as a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination along with the cast. In 2015, Hahn starred in the Showtime comedy-drama Happyish, but the show was canceled after a single season. That year Hahn co-starred in the science-fiction adventure film Tomorrowland, and starred in the box-office horror hit The Visit. She also starred in Peter Bogdanovich's She's Funny That Way. 
In 2016, Hahn appeared in the drama film Captain Fantastic, for which the ensemble cast received a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination, and in the comedy film Bad Moms. IndieWire's Kate Erbland gave the film a B−, noting that it "boasts some good jokes but Hahn's revelatory performance is the big draw." The film earned more than $183.9 million with a budget of $20 million. She next appeared in the Amazon comedy series I Love Dick, based on the novel by the same name by Chris Kraus and directed by Joey Soloway. It premiered on August 19, 2016. Following the financial success from Bad Moms, STX Entertainment greenlit a sequel titled A Bad Moms Christmas. It was released in November 2017 and earned more than $130 million with a budget of $28 million. The same year, Hahn authored her first children's book My Wish for You.


=== 2018–present: Focus on television ===

In 2018, Hahn starred in the drama film Private Life, directed by Tamara Jenkins. She received critical acclaim for her performance. She began appearing in television commercials for Chrysler. The same year, Hahn had voice roles in two animated films from Sony Pictures Animation. First, Hahn provided the voice of character Ericka Van Helsing in the comedy Hotel Transylvania 3: Summer Vacation. Second, Hahn had a voice role in the film Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse, as Dr. Olivia "Liv" Octavius / Doctor Octopus. In 2019, Hahn starred in and produced the HBO comedy miniseries Mrs. Fletcher. Hahn's performance as protagonist Eve Fletcher received critical praise. In 2020, Hahn starred in the HBO drama miniseries I Know This Much Is True, based on the novel of the same name by Wally Lamb. That same year, Hahn began voicing Paige Hunter in the Apple TV+ animated musical comedy series Central Park. Apple Inc. had given a two-season order to Central Park, with each season set to consist of thirteen episodes.
In 2021, Hahn joined the Marvel Cinematic Universe by starring in the Disney+ limited series WandaVision as Agnes, a mysterious "nosy neighbor", later revealed to be Agatha Harkness. The role earned her nominations for a  Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress and a Critics' Choice Award for Best Supporting Actress. Her character's theme song, "Agatha All Along", went viral. It earned the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics and was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media. Her next miniseries The Shrink Next Door premiered on Apple TV+ on November 12, 2021. She played Jo Polniaczek in The Facts of Life segment of the third edition of Live in Front of a Studio Audience on December 7, 2021.
In 2022, Hahn starred in Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery, the sequel to the 2019 mystery film Knives Out. The role earned her and the rest of the cast a Critics' Choice Award Best Acting Ensemble. During the summer of 2022, Hahn was featured in a series of "Back to School" commercials for Amazon. In June, she was announced to voice Honey in a film titled Fixed. The same month, it was announced that she would star in the upcoming Hulu limited series Tiny Beautiful Things based on the bestselling book by Cheryl Strayed. On April 7, 2023, Hulu released all eight episodes of Tiny Beautiful Things, in which Hahn starred in the lead role of Clare. She was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Female Actor for her performance.

In 2024, Hahn starred in the WandaVision spinoff focused on Agatha Harkness, Agatha All Along. When the series was first reported, it was also stated Hahn signed an overall deal with Marvel Studios. The project, originally titled Agatha: House of Harkness, was retitled Agatha: Coven of Chaos in July 2022, and later to Agatha: Darkhold Diaries in September 2023, and finally to Agatha All Along in May 2024, with episodes released from September through October 2024. For her performance in the series, Hahn was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress and an Independent Spirit Award for Best Lead Performance. She reprised her role in the third season of the Disney+ animated series What If...?. Hahn was the guest narrator at the Disneyland Candlelight Processional in December 2024. She also appeared in the third season of the Roku Channel comedy series Die Hart.
Since 2025, Hahn has been starring in the critically acclaimed Apple TV+ comedy series The Studio as Maya Mason, a role which earned her a nomination for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress. She is also set to star in David O. Russel's upcoming sports drama film Madden as Virginia Madden opposite Nicolas Cage.


== Personal life ==
Since 2002, Hahn has been married to actor Ethan Sandler, whom she met at Northwestern University. They reside in Los Feliz, Los Angeles and have two children.
Hahn has been a long-term supporter of Planned Parenthood, and participated in their Get Out The Vote campaign in 2018. For her continued advocacy and support of LGBTQ+ rights, Hahn is a two-time holder of the Human Rights Campaign's Ally for Equality Award. Hahn has also been active in animal advocacy. As of 2021, her family has two rescue dogs and fostered three kittens during the COVID-19 pandemic. In September 2024, Hahn partnered with The Dodo for a special segment where she spent time with animals in need of homes.


== Acting credits ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Theater ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== Discography ==


== Bibliography ==
My Wish for You (2017)


== References ==


== External links ==

Kathryn Hahn at IMDb 
Kathryn Hahn at the Internet Broadway Database