Lane Toran Caudell (born October 15, 1982) is an American actor and musician. He is known for his voice roles on Disney's Recess and Nickelodeon's Hey Arnold!


== Career ==
Toran played Rod on 7th Heaven, an American television series about a Protestant minister's family living in the fictional town of Glenoak, California, appearing in 9 episodes from 1997 to 2001. 
In animation, he was the first actor to provide the voice of the title role of Arnold Shortman (season 1) and later in the series, the voice of Wolfgang, the leader of the sadistic and heartless 5th grade bullies, on the Nickelodeon animated show Hey Arnold!' He provided the voice of King Bob on Disney's Recess.'
In the 1995 film Max Is Missing, Toran plays the part of a 12-year-old boy who accompanies his family on vacation to Peru. The boy is separated from his father while visiting the ancient Incan ruins of Machu Picchu. Thieves chase him after he is given a priceless mask by a dying man.
Over a year later, Toran starred in the light-hearted fantasy Johnny Mysto: Boy Wizard. In this film, aimed at a pre-teen audience, he plays the part of a budding young magician who stumbles across an unusual ring. He embarks on a medieval, time-travel quest to find his enchanted sister and ends up in Camelot before King Arthur. It turns out the ring belongs to none other than Merlin.
Toran performed the lead vocals for several TV series and has appeared on stage in Oliver!, Peter Pan and Li'l Abner. He has played Conrad Birdie in Bye Bye Birdie, the Lion in the Wiz and the Prince in Cinderella in theatre.
Together with Haylie Duff he co-wrote the song "Sweet Sixteen" on Hilary Duff's second studio album Metamorphosis.
Toran announced in 2016 on his Instagram profile that he would return to Hey Arnold! to voice characters for the 2017 television movie Hey Arnold!: The Jungle Movie.
He performs lead vocals on his own original songs and with the band DieRadioDie in Los Angeles.


== Personal life ==
Toran is the son of musician and singer Lane Caudell.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Lane Toran at Rotten Tomatoes
Lane Toran at IMDb 
Caudell voice demo reel on voicebank.net (mp3)