Lauren Lorraine Jones, born August 27, 1982, is an American actress, model, fashion designer, broadcaster and professional wrestling valet. Best known for her lead role on FOX's short lived scripted reality series Anchorwoman and for her time with the World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE).


== Acting career ==
Jones has appeared in a number of film and television shows. Jones featured in the film The Expendables, opposite Sylvester Stallone and Mickey Rourke, playing the role of Cheyenne, Mickey's love interest. She also played a small role in Spider-Man 3. She has also featured in many minor roles in television series such as; Rescue Me, The Naked Brothers Band, Wonder Showzen and Guiding Light.
In 2007 Jones was the star of FOX's scripted reality series Anchorwoman which premiered on August 22, 2007. The show was cancelled from the network after two episodes aired back to back due to poor ratings, the debut scored a 2.0 rating on fast nationals and was reported to have 2.7 million viewers overall.


== Modeling career ==
Jones worked as a bikini and lingerie model, featuring in multiple magazines. She also participated in beauty pageants, becoming 2007 Miss Mississippi USA runner-up and becoming a finalist in Miss New York USA 2006. She was a Barker's Beauty on The Price is Right between 2006-2007.
She won the Miss MET-RX model search in 2007 and modeled in multiple advertisements for AXE Deodrant, Burger King and Coppertone Sunscreen.
She also starred in the 2007 Baywatch workout DVD series.


== Professional wrestling career ==
In late 2004 Jones began appearing for the WWE on the Smackdown! brand. She made her official debut in a backstage segment as the newest WWE Diva alongside Michelle McCool and Rochelle Loewen, complimenting John Cena on his new championship belt. The following week Jones, Loewen and McCool accompanied Cena to the ring for his rap battle against Kenzo Suzuki, she then entered a short feud with Suzuki's valet Hiroko. Jones began appearing sporadically in backstage segments, on an episode of Smackdown! she was featured practicing her ring entrance. Jones competed in the 2005 No Way Out Smackdown! Rookie Diva of the Year Contest, hosted by Dawn Marie and Torrie Wilson, competing against Joy Giovanni, Michelle McCool and Rochelle Loewen, Giovanni won the competition with 65% of the fan votes. The contest included an evening gown contest, a talent contest in which Jones danced and a bikini contest. Jones was released from the company shortly after. She was featured in the direct to DVD WWE Viva Las Divas special.
Jones made an appearance at a 2011 RAW house show after meeting with WWE talent relations John Laurinaitis to discuss a potential return with the company.


== Fashion design ==
Jones has her own footwear range. She earned a BBA degree in design and management from Parsons School of Design in 2004. Her brand, Lauren Lorraine, began as bridal shoes and rapidly expanded after being picked up by major retailers across the nation in 2009, expanding to also include luxury bags and other types of shoes. Her and her brand were featured on the cover of GLAM week magazine in April 2025.


== Personal life ==
Jones briefly worked as a broadcaster at WJQS Radio Station, hosting her own radio show on 1400AM.
She currently maintains an active social media presence with nearly one million followers on her official Instagram page.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official Lauren Jones Website
Lauren Jones at IMDb
Lauren Lorraine Shoes