Linda Park (born July 9, 1978) is a South Korean-born American actress. She is best known for playing communications officer Hoshi Sato in the science-fiction series Star Trek: Enterprise.


== Early life ==
Park was born in South Korea and raised in San Jose, California. She participated in a number of theatrical productions in her teens at Notre Dame High School and Bellarmine College Preparatory.
In 2000, she received a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree from Boston University. During her college career, she spent a semester in England, studying at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art and the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. Her college stage credits included Mad Forest, Lysistrata, Cyrano de Bergerac, Richard III, and The Trojan Women.


== Career ==

In 2001, Park had a small role in the feature film Jurassic Park III as the assistant to the character Ellie Sattler.
Also in 2001, less than a year after graduation, she was cast as Hoshi Sato in Star Trek: Enterprise, the sixth series of the Star Trek franchise, which premiered in September 2001. Sato is the ship's communications officer, with a natural gift for translating alien languages. Park herself is fluent in English and Korean, and also speaks some French.
In August 2003, Park produced and starred in her first short film, My Prince, My Angel (2003).
Park is a co-founder of the theater company Underground Asylum (UA). In October 2003, she starred in UA's world premiere of the Mary Fengar Gail one-act play Fuchsia, at The Hudson Theatres in Los Angeles. In 2010, she played Clytemnestra in a production of Agamemnon at the Barbara and Lawrence Fleischman Theater in Los Angeles. In 2011, she played Anne Deever in a production of Arthur Miller's All My Sons at the Matrix Theater in Los Angeles.
In 2009, Park became a series regular in the second season of Crash, playing Maggie Cheon. The show was subsequently cancelled after the death of series lead Dennis Hopper.


== Personal life ==
Park married actor Daniel Bess on October 11, 2014. On June 17, 2018, she gave birth to their son. On February 14, 2024, Park announced that she and Bess had been separated for over a year and had divorced.
Park was diagnosed with lupus in 1997.
Park is an active student of dance, remarking that "dancing has always been my second love". She has continued to study and practice ballet and other dance forms.


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Linda Park at IMDb 
 Media related to Linda Park at Wikimedia Commons