The following is a list of presidents, notable alumni, and faculty members of Miami University, in Oxford, Ohio, U.S.


== Alumni ==


=== Academia ===
Carol Anderson, professor of African American Studies at Emory University
John Alexander Anderson, former Congressman from Kansas; consul to Egypt; second president of Kansas State University
C. Michael Armstrong, chairman, board of trustees Johns Hopkins Medicine, Health System Corp. and Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland
Joseph M. Bachelor, poet, professor
Donald Barr, professor of Human Ecology at Cornell University and leader of movement to disinvest in South Africa
Jeffrey Brown, dean, College of Business, University of Illinois
David A. Caputo, president of Pace University
Ronald Crutcher, president of University of Richmond; formerly, president of Wheaton College
Katharine Jane Densford, director of the University of Minnesota School of Nursing, provided important nursing leadership during World War II
David Dickey, statistician
Alston Ellis, president of Ohio University
John Feldmeier, professor of Political Science at Wright State University and First Amendment attorney
Grayson L. Kirk, former president of Columbia University
Benjamin Lee, theoretical physicist
Carolyn Ringer Lepre, academic administrator
Jeffrey Lieberman, president of American Psychiatric Association; chief of psychiatry at Columbia University
Henry Mitchell MacCracken, former Chancellor of New York University
Arman Manukyan, Professor of Bogazici University in Istanbul
Jeffrey McKee, biological anthropologist, academic, and author
Fannie Ruth Robinson, president of Oxford College until 1893
Mark B. Rosenberg, Chancellor of the State University System of Florida
Donna Shalala, former U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services for President Bill Clinton, current president of the University of Miami (Florida) and a graduate of the Western College for Women prior to its merger with Miami University
Ernest H. Volwiler, former chairman, Abbott Labs and co-inventor, Pentothal
Joseph Pomeroy Widney, 2nd president of the University of Southern California, 1st dean of the USC School of Medicine, physician of scientific medical data; former director of the United States Public Health Service; former director of the New York Public Library; enlisted by philanthropist Andrew Carnegie to help develop a worldwide library system, resulting in the Carnegie libraries
Richard K. Wilson, director, The Genome Institute at Washington University in St. Louis


=== Art ===
Fletcher Benton, sculptor and painter
Leslie Greene Bowman, art curator and museum administrator
Austin Kleon, artist
Roger Welch, artist


=== Business ===
C. Michael Armstrong, former CEO of AT&T, Hughes Electronics and Comcast Corporation; former chairman of the IBM World Trade Corporation
Arthur D. Collins, Jr., chairman (retired), Medtronic, Inc.
Emily E. Douglas, CEO and founder of Grandma's Gifts Inc.
Bruce Downey, CEO of Barr Pharmaceuticals
Richard T. Farmer, founder and chairman of Cintas Corporation
Tom Fox, CEO of Aston Villa football club, England
Lynn Good, chairman, president and CEO of Duke Energy
Ryan Graves, head of global operations, Uber
Gregory D. Hague, entrepreneur, lawyer, author
Sheraton Kalouria, chief marketing officer and executive vice president at Sony Pictures Television
Samuel Laws, inventor of the stock ticker on the New York Gold Exchange
Marne Levine, COO of Instagram
Kim Lubel, chairman and CEO of CST Brands
Richard McVey, founder, chairman and CEO of MarketAxess
Dwight Merriman, Internet executive and entrepreneur; co-founder of DoubleClick, current subsidiary of Google
Brian Niccol, CEO of Starbucks, formerly chairman and CEO of Chipotle
Dinesh Paliwal, chairman, CEO and president of Harman International
John H. Patterson, founder of NCR (National Cash Register)
Mitchell Rales, co-founder, CEO, and current chairman of the executive committee and Director of Danaher Corporation
Jack Rogers, chairman of the board and CEO of United Parcel Service (retired)
Jeff Schwartz, founder and president of Excel Sports Management
John G. Smale, CEO at Procter & Gamble; chairman of General Motors


=== Entertainment ===
Kirk Baily, actor; Kevin 'Ug' Lee on Salute Your Shorts
Rebecca Budig, actress, All My Children
Larry Clark, award-winning filmmaker associated with the "Los Angeles School of Black Filmmakers"
Art Clokey, claymation artist and creator of Gumby and Pokey
Joseph W. Clokey, organist, composer
Ray Combs, Family Feud game show host (did not graduate)
Chase Crawford, actor and producer (did not graduate)
Charles Michael Davis, actor and director
Mike Emrick, NHL play-by-play for New Jersey Devils, NBC, Versus; London and Rio Olympics announcer for NBC
Theresa Flaminio, musician
Bill Hemmer, Fox News Channel anchor
Mark Hentemann, executive producer of Family Guy
Griffin House, singer/songwriter
Nick Lachey, pop musician; 98 Degrees (did not graduate)
Eric Lange, television and movie actor
Katie Lee, television personality, food critic, and ex-wife of pop music superstar Billy Joel
The Lemon Pipers, 1960s psychedelic band
Tina Louise, actress; Ginger on Gilligan's Island
Rick Ludwin, NBC television executive
Terence Moore, sports journalist, CNN.com, AOL FanHouse, sports on Earth.com, ESPN Outside the Lines, MSNBC
Mojo Nixon, musician
Jeff Pegues, CBS News correspondent; former Miami football player (wide receiver)
Plies, rapper
Steven Reineke, conductor of The New York Pops
Jackson Rohm, pop/country musician
Chris Rose, sportscaster
Kristen Erwin Schlotman, film producer
Beth Stelling, comedian
Kate Voegele, singer, songwriter, guitarist, and pianist; also known for a prominent role in CW TV series One Tree Hill (did not graduate)
Jack Warshaw, folk singer, songwriter, musician
John M. Watson, Sr., trombonist with Red Saunders and Count Basie Orchestras; educator; actor in 13 movies (The Fugitive, Soul Food) and several theater roles including the Broadway production of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest
Gerri Willis, television news journalist; host of The Willis Report on Fox Business Network; formerly with CNN hosting Your Bottom Line and as the senior financial correspondent of SmartMoney
Matthew Yuricich, Academy Award winner, special effects


=== Law ===
James M. Alexander, retired Judge of Michigan's Sixth Judicial Circuit Court (2001–2020)
Frederic W. Allen, Chief Justice of the Vermont Supreme Court (1984–1997)
Burnie Bridge, Wisconsin Court of Appeals
Richard S. Brown, Wisconsin Court of Appeals
Jennifer Brunner, current Justice of the Supreme Court of Ohio and first female Ohio Secretary of State
John F. Kibbey, Indiana Attorney General
Samuel Taylor Marshall, lawyer and founder of Beta Theta Pi
John Weld Peck II, Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
Camille Stewart, cybersecurity attorney
Anthony Thornton, Illinois Supreme Court Justice and U.S. Representative from Illinois
Andy Vollmer, former Acting General Counsel, United States Securities and Exchange Commission


=== Literature and journalism ===

Ira Berkow, sports writer, The New York Times
Kathryn Craft, author of literary fiction and contemporary women's fiction
Rita Dove, Pulitzer Prize winner; first African-American U.S. Poet Laureate; Consultant to the Library of Congress; 2012 recipient, Presidential National Medal of Arts Award
Eric Ehrmann, columnist, sports and global affairs, Huffington Post, LePost-LeMonde, pioneer contributor to Rolling Stone in 1968, member of PEN (dropped out 1968)
Wil Haygood, Washington Post writer; author of A Butler Well Served by This Election, inspiration for the movie The Butler, Two on the River, King of Cats: The Life and Times of Adam Clayton Powell Jr., and The Haygoods of Columbus: A Love Story
Dave Hyde, sports columnist, Sun Sentinel
Rajiv Joseph, dramatist and Pulitzer Prize finalist
Alexander C. McClurg, senior partner of A. C. McClurg and Union Army general
Dorothy Misener Jurney, the "godmother of women's pages" (Western College)
P. J. O'Rourke, conservative satirist
Mariel Padilla, journalist, Pulitzer Prize winner
Marvin Pierce, former president of McCall Corporation, father of First Lady Barbara Bush
Whitelaw Reid, editor-in-chief, New York Tribune; US vice presidential candidate with President Benjamin Harrison (the only time in US history that presidential and vice presidential candidates were alumni of the same university)
Bill Sammon, Senior White House Correspondent, Washington Examiner, formerly at the Washington Times; and political analyst for Fox News Channel, and the author of four New York Times bestsellers
David Teeuwen (1970–2015), managing editor of USA Today, where he helped pioneer digital news
Joseph Pomeroy Widney, prolific author


=== Military ===

Stan Arthur, U.S. Navy admiral
Stuart P. Baker, U.S. Navy admiral
Joseph R. Davis, C.S. Army general and commanding general of the Mississippi National Guard 1888–1895
Arthur F. Gorham, U.S. Army Distinguished Service Cross recipient
Terrence C. Graves, U.S. Marine Corps Medal of Honor recipient
James G. Jones, U.S. Air Force general
Thomas E. Kuenning Jr., U.S. Air Force general
Robert J. Meder, U.S. Army Air Forces pilot and participant in the Doolittle Raid
Joseph Ralston, U.S. Air Force general and commander of the U.S. European Command/SHAPE 2000–2003
William W. Rogers, U.S. Marine Corps general
Stephen Clegg Rowan, U.S. Navy admiral
Durbin Ward, U.S. Army general
Lester J. Whitlock, U.S. Army major general


=== Politics ===


==== President and prime minister ====
Benjamin Harrison, 23rd President of the United States (1889–1893)
Chung Un-chan, former Prime Minister of South Korea


==== U.S. Senate ====
Calvin Stewart Brice, former U.S. Senator, railroad magnate and campaign manager for Grover Cleveland's U.S. presidential campaign against Brice's fellow Miami alumnus, Benjamin Harrison
Maria Cantwell, current U.S. Senator from Washington
George Ellis Pugh, former U.S. Senator
Milton Sayler, U.S. Representative from Ohio
Steve Wilson, current State Senator for Ohio's 7th Districts, former CEO of Lebanon Citizens National Bank


==== U.S. House of Representatives ====
Susan Brooks, U.S. Congresswoman from Indiana's 5th Congressional District
Sara Carruthers, member of the Ohio House of Representatives
Courtney Combs, member of Ohio House of Representatives
Ozro J. Dodds, U.S. Representative from Ohio
Steve Driehaus, former U.S. Representative from the 1st district of Ohio
Samuel Galloway, U.S. Representative from Ohio (1855–57)
Isaac M. Jordan, U.S. Representative from Ohio
Michael Oxley, Member of Congress and co-sponsor of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Paul Ryan, Speaker of the U.S. House of Representatives; 2012 GOP vice presidential candidate; U.S. Congressman from Wisconsin's 1st district
David Taylor, U.S. Representative from Ohio's 2nd congressional district


==== Governor ====
Charles Anderson, 27th governor of Ohio (1865–1866)
James Edwin Campbell, 38th Governor of Ohio
William Dennison Jr., 24th governor of Ohio (1860–1862) and U.S. Postmaster General
Mike DeWine, 70th governor of Ohio, former U.S. Senator from Ohio
Andrew L. Harris, 44th governor of Ohio (1906–1909), U.S. Commissioner, American Civil War General
John J. McRae, 21st governor of Mississippi, Senator, U.S. Representative
Oliver P. Morton, former Indiana governor and U.S. Senator
John B. Weller, fifth governor of California, former Congressman from Ohio, U.S. Senator from California and Minister to Mexico


==== State ====
Timothy Derickson, member of Ohio House of Representatives
Denise Driehaus, member of Ohio House of Representatives
Thomas Hall, member of Ohio House of Representatives
Janet Greenip, Maryland State Senator
Helen Jones-Kelley, former director of the Ohio Department of Job and Family Services
Dave Karmol, member of Ohio House of Representatives


==== Local ====
Michael Cabonargi, commissioner of the Cook County Board of Review
Herman Goldner, mayor of St. Petersburg, Florida, 1961–1967, 1971–1973
Paul Muenzer, former Mayor of Naples, Florida (1992–1996)
Yvette Simpson, current member and President Pro-Tempore of the Cincinnati City Council


==== Ambassador ====
John E. Dolibois, ambassador to Luxembourg and interrogator at the Nuremberg Trials
Shefali Razdan Duggal, current United States ambassador to the Netherlands
Kenneth Merten, U.S. Ambassador to Croatia (2012–present)
Whitelaw Reid, U.S. Ambassador to France, 1889–1892, and U.S. Ambassador to the Court of St. James, 1905–1912


==== Other ====
Stan Greenberg, Democratic Party pollster and campaign strategist for Bill Clinton, Al Gore, and John Kerry
William Isaac, chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 1981–1985
Brigham McCown, former U.S. Department of Transportation regulator during the George W. Bush administration
Steve Ricchetti, Counselor to the President; Chief of Staff to US Vice President Joe Biden; former deputy chief of staff to President Bill Clinton
Michael Sekora, founder and director of the intelligence community's classified program, Project Socrates during the Reagan administration
Caleb Blood Smith, sixth United States Secretary of the Interior, serving in the Cabinet of Abraham Lincoln
Sidney Souers, first Central Intelligence Agency Director appointed by President Harry S. Truman


=== Sports ===


==== Baseball ====
Walter Alston (1935), former manager of the Brooklyn and Los Angeles Dodgers baseball teams; earned four World Series championships and seven National League pennants
Bill Doran, former second baseman for the Houston Astros, Cincinnati Reds, and Milwaukee Brewers; bench coach, Kansas City Royals
Adam Eaton, current center fielder for the Washington Nationals; formerly with Chicago White Sox and Arizona Diamondbacks
John Ely, Major League Baseball pitcher, Los Angeles Dodgers
Steve Fireovid, former Major League Baseball Pitcher and author of "The 26th Man: One Minor League Pitcher's Pursuit of a Dream."
Danny Hall (1977), head baseball coach, Georgia Tech
Charlie Leibrandt (1978), former pitcher for the Cincinnati Reds, Kansas City Royals, Atlanta Braves, and Texas Rangers; 140-119 Major League record
Bill Long, former pitcher in Major League Baseball, played for the Chicago White Sox, Chicago Cubs and Montreal Expos
Marvin Miller, union leader Major League Baseball Players Association (attended Miami University before transferring to and graduating from NYU)
Tim Naehring, former MLB player, Boston Red Sox
Ty Neal (1999), college baseball coach at Cincinnati
Scott Sauerbeck, Major League Baseball pitcher, Cincinnati Reds


==== Basketball ====
Randy Ayers (1978), former NBA player and college head coach at Ohio State University and head coach of the NBA's Philadelphia 76ers, assistant coach of the Orlando Magic and current assistant coach of NBA Washington Wizards
Michael Bramos, professional basketball player; joined the Spanish ACB League club Gran Canaria in 2010
Wayne Embry (1958), senior advisor and former general manager, NBA Toronto Raptors; former NBA player and NBA executive with the Milwaukee Bucks and Cleveland Cavaliers, and was the first African American NBA general manager and team president; two-time basketball All-American at Miami
Fred Foster, former player, NBA Portland Trail Blazers
Ron Harper, retired NBA player, five-time NBA Champion, Chicago Bulls and Los Angeles Lakers; coach, Detroit Pistons and Orlando Magic
Darrell Hedric (1955), winningest basketball coach in Miami history
Ron Hunter, head men's basketball coach, Georgia State University; formerly head men's basketball coach, IUPUI
Phil Lumpkin (1981), player, NBA Portland Trail Blazers and Phoenix Suns, later became a successful high school basketball coach in Washington State
Matt Lynch (Master's, 2015), as of 2024 the only out head coach in men's college basketball
Julian Mavunga, professional basketball player, currently with Kyoto Hannaryz of Japanese First Division
Ira Newble, NBA player, Cleveland Cavaliers, Seattle SuperSonics and Los Angeles Lakers
Rob Senderoff, college basketball coach
Wally Szczerbiak (1999), NBA player, Cleveland Cavaliers, Boston Celtics and Minnesota Timberwolves; current CBS Sports Announcer


==== Football ====
Jerry Angelo, general manager of the Chicago Bears
JoJuan Armour, former NFL and CFL player
Bill Arnsparger (1949), NFL coach, Baltimore Colts and Miami Dolphins, San Diego Chargers; NCAA football coach; head coach, LSU; athletic director, University of Florida
Bob Babich (1969), former NFL player, San Diego Chargers and Cleveland Browns; First-Team All-American in football
Jacob Bell, NFL, St. Louis Rams
Eric Beverly, NFL player, Detroit Lions and Atlanta Falcons
Earl "Red" Blaik (1918), former head coach, Army football; member of the NFL Foundation Hall of Fame
Brandon Brooks, NFL player, Philadelphia Eagles and Houston Texans
Paul Brown (1930), partial founder of the Cleveland Browns and the Cincinnati Bengals and the first head coach for both teams
Rob Carpenter (1977), NFL player, where he rushed for 4,363 yards in a 10-year career with the Houston Oilers, New York Giants and Los Angeles Rams
Carmen Cozza (1952), former head football coach, Yale University; played in NFL for Green Bay Packers and in Cleveland Indians and Chicago White Sox organization
Tom Crabtree, NFL tight end, Green Bay Packers
Paul Dietzel (1948), All-American center, football; head coach, football at LSU, South Carolina and Army; National Coach of the Year
Jacques Dussault, World League of American Football head coach at Montreal Machine; CFL assistant coach at Montreal Alouettes and Montreal Concordes; Albany Great Danes defensive coordinator
Weeb Ewbank (1928), Super Bowl-winning NFL head coach; won two NFL titles with the Baltimore Colts and the New York Jets
Trevor Gaylor, player, NFL, Kansas City Chiefs
John Harbaugh (1984), head coach, Baltimore Ravens
Bob Hitchens (1974), player, NFL, New England Patriots, Kansas City Chiefs and Pittsburgh Steelers
Alphonso Hodge, NFL player, cornerback, Kansas City Chiefs
Bob Jencks (1963), NFL player, Washington Redskins and Chicago Bears; Super Bowl Champions with Chicago Bears
Ernie Kellermann (1965), former defensive back for the Cleveland Browns, Cincinnati Bengals and Buffalo Bills
Aaron Kromer, NFL, New Orleans Saints 2012 Interim Head Coach; Offensive Line and Running Game Coach
Bill Mallory (1957), head football coach, Miami University, University of Colorado at Boulder, Indiana University Bloomington; Big Ten Coach of the Year
Ryan McNeil, former NFL player
John McVay (1953), former head coach, New York Giants; general manager, San Francisco 49ers (5 Super Bowl Championships; NFL Executive of the Year winner)
Sean McVay, head coach, Los Angeles Rams (youngest head coach in NFL history); tight ends coach, Washington Redskins
Jake O'Connell, tight end, NFL, Kansas City Chiefs
Henry Orth, football player
Ara Parseghian (1949), former head football coach of the Notre Dame Fighting Irish
John Pont (1952), head football coach, Miami University, Yale University, Indiana University, Northwestern University; national Coach of the Year; led Indiana to Big Ten title and Rose Bowl
Travis Prentice, retired NFL player, NCAA Division I-A Career leader in points scored, Cleveland Browns, Minnesota Vikings
Ryne Robinson, NFL player, Carolina Panthers
Ben Roethlisberger (2012), NFL player, two time Super Bowl winning quarterback for the Pittsburgh Steelers
Quinten Rollins, NFL player, Green Bay Packers
Ollie Savatsky, NFL player, Cleveland Rams
Bo Schembechler (1951), former football head coach of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor Wolverines
Sam Sloman (born 1997), NFL football player
Sherman Smith (1976), NFL player, Seattle Seahawks, running backs coach, Seattle Seahawks, coach Tennessee Titans, offensive coordinator Washington Redskins
Milt Stegall, CFL player, Winnipeg Blue Bombers, CFL all-time leader in receiving yards and touchdowns; NFL player, Cincinnati Bengals
Alex Sulfsted, player, NFL, Kansas City Chiefs
Jerry Walker (1971), team archivist San Francisco 49ers; Director of Public Relations San Francisco 49ers; sports information director Lorain County Community College, University of New Orleans and San Jose State; assistant SID LSU
Randy Walker (1976), former head football coach at Miami and Northwestern University
Sheldon White, vice president of Pro Personnel, Detroit Lions, Inc.; former NFL player with New York Giants, Detroit Lions and Cincinnati Bengals
Kevin Wilson, offensive coordinator, Ohio State University football team; former head coach, Indiana University football team
Nobby Wirkowski (1951), professional football player and coach
Ron Zook, former head football coach at the University of Illinois and University of Florida


==== Hockey ====
Kevyn Adams, former NHL player, Chicago Blackhawks; member of 2006 Stanley Cup champion Carolina Hurricanes
Riley Barber, player, NHL, Washington Capitals
Chris Bergeron, head men's hockey coach, former head coach at Bowling Green and former professional hockey center
Enrico Blasi, former head men's hockey coach, Miami University; two-time recipient of national coach of the year award
Dan Boyle (1998), NHL player for the New York Rangers and San Jose Sharks; won Stanley Cup and 2010 gold medal with Canadian Olympic Team
Carter Camper, NHL player, New Jersey Devils; formerly, Boston Bruins
Patrick Cannone, NHL player, Minnesota Wild
Alain Chevrier (1984), NHL player, New Jersey Devils
Blake Coleman, NHL player, New Jersey Devils
Austin Czarnik, NHL player, Boston Bruins, Calgary Flames
vMike Emrick, NHL play-by-play for New Jersey Devils, NBC, Versus; London and Rio Olympics announcer for NBC
Mike Glumac, NHL player, St. Louis Blues
Andy Greene, NHL player, New Jersey Devils
Ryan Jones, NHL player, Edmonton Oilers; Nashville Predators
Sean Kuraly, NHL player, Boston Bruins
Vincent LoVerde, player, NHL Los Angeles Kings organization
Alec Martinez, NHL player, three-time Stanley Cup champion, Las Vegas Golden Knights
Curtis McKenzie, player, NHL, Dallas Stars
Justin Mercier, NHL player, Colorado Avalanche organization
Andy Miele, 2011 Hobey Baker Award recipient; NHL player, Philadelphia Flyers, Phoenix Coyotes
Randy Robitaille, NHL player, Ottawa Senators
Jack Roslovic, NHL player, Winnipeg Jets organization; member of 2017 gold medal United States World Juniors team
Brian Savage, NHL player, Philadelphia Flyers
Cameron Schilling, NHL player, Chicago Blackhawks; and Washington Capitals organization
Reilly Smith, NHL player, Florida Panthers, formerly Boston Bruins and Dallas Stars
Gary Steffes, professional hockey player, AHL, varied teams; member of Team USA at the 2005 IIHF World U18 Championships
Justin Vaive, player, NHL New York Islanders organization
Trent Vogelhuber, player, NHL Colorado Avalanche, Columbus Blue Jackets organization
Chris Wideman, NHL player, Ottawa Senators
Hayley Williams, Russian Women's Hockey League player
Tommy Wingels, NHL player, San Jose Sharks
Jeff Zatkoff, NHL goaltender, Los Angeles Kings, Pittsburgh Penguins; member of 2016 Stanley Cup champion Pittsburgh Penguins


==== Wrestling ====
Mark Coleman (1985–1987), NCAA All-American wrestler who placed 4th in 1986 (190lbs), retired professional Mixed Martial Artist, first ever UFC Heavyweight Champion and UFC Hall of Fame member
Mike Mizanin, aka The Miz, WWE wrestler/entertainer
Brian Pillman, professional wrestler


==== Other sports ====
Dave Abelson (born 1975), Canadian tennis player
Brad Adamonis, professional golfer who currently plays on the PGA Tour
Jack Baruth, pro BMX rider and Alt Fuel class winner of the 2006 Cannonball Run
Brendan Burke, inspiration for You Can Play organization
Bud Haidet (1957), athletic director, University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee; instrumental in their move from NAIA to NCAA Division I membership in 1990
Bill Mulliken (1961), 1960 Olympic gold medalist, swimming
Bob Schul (1966), 1964 Olympic Gold medalist, 5000m run
Amelia Strickler, British shot putter; 3-time National Champion; European, Commonwealth and World finalist
Steve Strome (1964), Tennis Coach, Miami, LSU, Duke and Army


=== Theology ===

Joseph R. Binzer, auxiliary bishop of the Archdiocese of Cincinnati, 2011–2020
David Swing, 19th-century preacher and liberal theologian; confidant of Abraham Lincoln and Mary Todd Lincoln
William McClure Thomson, 19th-century missionary based in Lebanon
Walter Wangerin, Jr., theologian and award-winning author
Joseph Pomeroy Widney, co-founder of the Church of the Nazarene and the Church of the All-Father


== Notable faculty and staff ==


=== Faculty ===
José Antonio Bowen, President of Goucher College
Raymond Burke, instructor, businessman, founder of the Miami University Men's Glee Club and member of the United States House of Representatives from Ohio's third district
Karen Dawisha, political scientist, author of Putin's Kleptocracy
Burton L. French, professor and member of the United States House of Representatives from Idaho's 1st congressional district
Walter Havighurst, English professor and namesake of the Havighurst Center for Russian and Post-Soviet Studies
Daisy Hernández, writer and editor
Louise Holland, academic, philologist and archaeologist
William Holmes McGuffey
Donald E. Parker, experimental psychologist and professor emeritus


=== Presidents of Miami University ===
The following persons have served as president of Miami University:

Table notes:


== See also ==
Cradle of Coaches


== References ==