Richard Michael DeWine ( də-WYNE; born January 5, 1947) is an American politician and attorney serving as the 70th governor of Ohio since 2019. A member of the Republican Party, he served as the 50th attorney general of Ohio from 2011 to 2019, in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1983 to 1991, and in the U.S. Senate from 1995 to 2007.
DeWine is a native of Yellow Springs, Ohio. He graduated from Miami University with a bachelor's degree in 1969 and earned a Juris Doctor from Ohio Northern University College of Law in 1972. After graduation, DeWine worked as an assistant prosecutor for Greene County and was elected county prosecutor, serving one term. He continued his political career in the Ohio Senate in 1980. He served as a U.S. representative from 1983 until 1991. In 1991, he was sworn in as the 59th lieutenant governor of Ohio, under George Voinovich.
DeWine was elected to the United States Senate in a landslide in the 1994 Republican Revolution. He served in the Senate until his defeat by Sherrod Brown in 2006. DeWine returned to politics four years later and became the 50th attorney general of Ohio, serving from 2011 to 2019. He was elected governor in 2018. During DeWine's first term as governor, a shooting in Dayton prompted him to urge the Ohio legislature to enact new gun control measures, such as expanding background checks and harsher penalties for those in possession of unregistered firearms.
In early 2020, DeWine received national attention for his COVID-19 response, ordering the closing of dine-in restaurant service and sporting events and delegating additional resources to elderly care facilities. He was reelected by a landslide 25% margin against Democratic nominee Nan Whaley, the former mayor of Dayton, in 2022.


== Early life and education ==

DeWine was born in Springfield, Ohio, on January 5, 1947, and grew up in nearby Yellow Springs, Ohio. He is the son of Jean Ruth (née Liddle) and Richard Lee DeWine. He was raised and identifies as a Roman Catholic. DeWine earned his Bachelor of Science degree in education from Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, in 1969 and a Juris Doctor from the Pettit College of Law at Ohio Northern University in 1972.


== Early political career ==

At age 25, DeWine started working as an assistant prosecuting attorney for Greene County, Ohio, and in 1976 was elected County Prosecutor, serving for four years. In 1980, he was elected to the Ohio State Senate and served one two-year term.


== U.S. House of Representatives ==
In 1982, U.S. representative Bud Brown of Ohio's 7th congressional district retired after 18 years in Congress; his father, Clarence Brown, Sr., had held the seat for 26 years before that. DeWine won the Republican nomination, assuring his election in November. He was reelected three more times from this district, which stretches from his home in Springfield to the Columbus suburbs. He ran unopposed in 1986 in what was regarded as a bad year for Republicans nationally.
In 1986, DeWine was one of the House impeachment managers who prosecuted the case in the impeachment trial of Judge Harry E. Claiborne. Claiborne was found guilty by the United States Senate and removed from his federal judgeship.


== Lieutenant Governor of Ohio and unsuccessful run for U.S. Senate ==
DeWine did not seek reelection to the House of Representatives in 1990, and briefly ran for governor, but withdrew before the primaries and instead ran for lieutenant governor as George Voinovich's running mate in that year's Ohio gubernatorial election. The Voinovich-DeWine ticket was easily elected.
In 1992, DeWine unsuccessfully ran for United States Senate against the former astronaut and incumbent senator John Glenn. His campaign used the phrase, "What on earth has John Glenn done?", echoing Jeff Bingaman's slogan "What on Earth has he done for you lately?" against former astronaut Harrison Schmitt in their 1982 Senate race.


== U.S. Senate ==

In 1994, DeWine ran again for Senate, defeating prominent attorney Joel Hyatt (the son-in-law of retiring Senator Howard Metzenbaum) by a 14-point margin. DeWine was reelected in 2000, defeating gunshow promoter Ronald Dickson (161,185 votes, or 12.44%) and former U.S. representative Frank Cremeans (104,219 votes, or 8.05%) in the primary and Ted Celeste (brother of former Ohio governor Dick Celeste) in the general election. DeWine sat on the Senate Judiciary and Select Intelligence committees. He was the initial sponsor of the Drug-Free Century Act in 1999 and was a member of the Gang of 14, a bipartisan group of senators that in 2005 made a compromise on judicial nominees. He voted in favor of the 2002 Iraq Resolution authorizing the use of force against Saddam Hussein.
In the 2006 United States Senate election in Ohio, DeWine ran for reelection but lost to U.S. representative and former Ohio secretary of state Sherrod Brown by 496,332 votes. He received 905,644 fewer votes in 2006 than he received in 2000.


== Out of government (2007–11) ==
DeWine accepted positions teaching government courses at Cedarville University, Ohio Northern University and Miami University. In 2007, he joined the law firm Keating Muething & Klekamp as corporate investigations group co-chair. He also advised the Ohio campaign of John McCain's 2008 presidential bid.


== Attorney General of Ohio ==

On July 21, 2009, DeWine announced his candidacy for attorney general of the State of Ohio. On November 2, 2010, he was elected attorney general, defeating incumbent Richard Cordray, 48% to 46%. As attorney general of Ohio, DeWine sent letters to drugstore chains encouraging them to discontinue the sale of tobacco products.
In the 2012 Republican presidential primary, DeWine endorsed Tim Pawlenty, then endorsed Mitt Romney after Pawlenty dropped out of the race. On February 17, 2012, DeWine announced he was retracting his endorsement of Romney and endorsed Rick Santorum. DeWine said, "To be elected president, you have to do more than tear down your opponents. You have to give the American people a reason to vote for you, a reason to hope, a reason to believe that under your leadership, America will be better. Rick Santorum has done that. Sadly, Governor Romney has not."
On November 4, 2014, DeWine was reelected as attorney general, defeating challenger David A. Pepper. He carried 83 of Ohio's 88 counties.


=== Legal challenge to the Affordable Care Act ===
In 2015, DeWine filed a lawsuit in federal court in Ohio against a part of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). In the suit, he alleged that the ACA's Transitional Reinsurance Program (which imposed a fee "paid by all employers who provide group health insurance in the workplace", which in 2014 was $63 per covered person and in 2015 was $44 per covered person) was unconstitutional as applied to state and local governments. When he filed the suit, DeWine claimed that the fee was "an unprecedented attempt to destroy the balance of authority between the federal government and the states".
In January 2016, the federal court dismissed DeWine's suit, with U.S. district judge Algenon L. Marbley holding that the Transitional Reinsurance Program did not violate the Constitution. DeWine appealed, but the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed Marbley's dismissal of the suit.


=== Criminal justice ===
DeWine's stated goal has been "Protecting Ohio Families". To that effect, he made it a priority to significantly reduce DNA testing turnaround times in connection with open criminal investigations. Under his predecessor, DNA testing at the Ohio attorney general's Bureau of Criminal Investigation (BCI) took approximately four months in cases such as murders, rapes, and assaults. Under the DeWine administration, DNA test results are now returned to local law enforcement in less than a month, leading to faster apprehension of dangerous suspects.
Upon taking office in 2011, DeWine launched a special sexual assault kit (SAK) testing initiative after learning that hundreds of police departments across Ohio had thousands of untested rape kits on their evidence room shelves. DeWine invested resources to test the 13,931 previously untested rape kits over the course of his administration, which led to more than 5,000 DNA hits in the Combined DNA Index System (CODIS). These DNA matches led to the indictments of approximately 700 alleged rapists, many of whom were serial attackers, connected to cases that would never have been solved if not for the DeWine initiative.
DeWine also launched the Crimes Against Children Initiative, which paired BCI criminal investigators with seasoned prosecuting attorneys to investigate and prosecute child predators. The Crimes Against Children Initiative focuses on holding accountable those who sexually and physically abuse children, those who share and view child pornography, and those who target children online. DeWine's office also developed several task forces for the investigation and prosecutions of human trafficking throughout the state.


=== Opioids ===
As attorney general, DeWine took steps to close down "pill mills" in Ohio that fueled the opioid epidemic. By the end of his first year in office, he had worked to close all 12 pill mills in Scioto County, considered by many to have been the national center of the prescription drug crisis. DeWine's efforts also led to more than 100 doctors and pharmacists losing their licenses for improper prescription practices. In 2013, DeWine formed a new Heroin Unit to provide Ohio communities with law enforcement, legal, and outreach assistance to combat the state's heroin problem. The Heroin Unit draws from new and existing office resources, including BCI investigative and laboratory services, Ohio Organized Crime Investigations Commission assistance, prosecutorial support, and outreach and education services. In October 2017, DeWine announced a 12-pronged plan to combat the opioid epidemic, drawing from his experience breaking up pill mills, prosecuting traffickers, supporting recovery, and advocating the importance of drug-use prevention education. In addition, he went after the pharmaceutical industry, suing opioid manufacturers and distributors for their alleged roles in fraudulent marketing and unsafe distribution of opioids that fueled the epidemic in Ohio and across the country.


=== Columbus Crew relocation lawsuit ===
In October 2017, news reports surfaced that Anthony Precourt, the investor-operator of the soccer club Columbus Crew, was exploring the option of moving the team out of state. After the Cleveland Browns moved to Baltimore in the late 1990s, the Ohio General Assembly passed a law requiring professional sports teams that had accepted taxpayer assistance to provide an opportunity for local owners to purchase the team before initiating a move. In December 2017, DeWine sent a letter to Precourt reminding him of his obligations under Ohio law. After Precourt failed to respond, DeWine filed suit against Precourt and Major League Soccer in March 2018 to enforce Ohio law and insist upon a reasonable opportunity for local investors to buy the team. As the lawsuit played out, an investor group including Dee and Jimmy Haslam, owners of the Cleveland Browns, and the Columbus-based Edwards family announced in October 2018 they were working out the details of a deal to keep the Crew in Columbus.


== Governor of Ohio ==


=== 2018 election ===

DeWine formally announced his candidacy for governor on May 26, 2016, becoming the first major Republican to enter the race to succeed term-limited incumbent John Kasich. He formally launched his campaign at his annual ice-cream social in Cedarville, Ohio, on June 25, 2017.
On December 1, 2017, DeWine selected Ohio Secretary of State Jon Husted—a former rival for the 2018 nomination—as his running mate, a move that unified much of the state Republican establishment behind the ticket.
In the May 8, 2018, Republican primary, DeWine defeated Lieutenant Governor Mary Taylor 59.8% to 40.2%. In the November 6 general election, he faced Democratic nominee Richard Cordray, the former director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and narrowly prevailed by a margin of 50.4% to 46.7% (a difference of approximately 166,000 votes).
DeWine was inaugurated as the 70th governor of Ohio on January 14, 2019, alongside Lieutenant Governor Jon Husted.


=== Tenure ===
DeWine's governorship has been characterized by a pragmatic, sometimes bipartisan approach that has occasionally put him at odds with the more conservative wing of the Ohio Republican Party. Key themes have included public-health preparedness, economic recovery after COVID-19, major infrastructure investment, children's issues (especially foster care and lead poisoning), and a cautious approach to social issues.


==== First term (2019–2023) ====


===== 2019 =====
Shortly after taking office, DeWine signed the biennial state budget, which included a modest gas-tax increase to fund infrastructure, the first such increase in 14 years. The budget also expanded school choice programs and funded mental-health initiatives.
In February 2019, President Donald Trump appointed DeWine to the bipartisan Council of Governors.
On August 4, 2019, a mass shooting in Dayton killed nine people and injured 27 others, coming just 13 hours after the 2019 El Paso shooting. At a vigil the following day, DeWine was repeatedly interrupted by chants of "Do something!" from the crowd. Two days later, on August 6, he unveiled a 17-point gun-safety plan that included a "red-flag" law allowing courts to temporarily remove firearms from individuals deemed dangerous, expanded background checks, stiffer penalties for felons in possession of guns, and increased mental-health funding. The proposals represented a notable departure from previous Republican governors and the National Rifle Association, which opposed them. A watered-down version of the background-check and penalty provisions eventually passed in 2022 as part of a larger concealed-carry reform bill.
Throughout 2019, DeWine pursued environmental and public-health initiatives, including the creation of the H2Ohio water-quality program and the appointment of a Lead Advisory Committee to address childhood lead exposure. He also expressed support for allowing municipalities to ban single-use plastic bags, opposing Republican-led efforts to preempt local bans.


===== 2020–2021: COVID-19 pandemic =====

DeWine's national profile rose dramatically during the early months of the COVID-19 pandemic. Working closely with Ohio Department of Health director Amy Acton, DeWine took a series of aggressive, science-driven actions that were among the earliest and most stringent in the nation:
March 3, 2020 – Limited the Arnold Sports Festival to athletes only (no spectators).
March 9 – Banned mass gatherings of more than 1,000 people.
March 12 – Closed all K–12 schools statewide (the first state to do so).
March 15 – Ordered bars and restaurants to close dine-in service.
March 17 – Postponed the March 17 primary election to June 2 (later conducted almost entirely by mail).
March 22 – Issued a stay-at-home order effective March 23.
These moves, initially criticized by some Republicans and business groups, were later widely praised. The Washington Post described Ohio's response as "a national guide to the crisis," and the BBC called DeWine "the US governor who saw it coming early."
DeWine's daily televised briefings with Dr. Acton became a fixture for Ohioans and drew national viewership. However, the strict measures also sparked protests in spring 2020, some featuring armed demonstrators at the Statehouse, and led to significant political backlash. Acton resigned in June 2020 amid threats and harassment.
Ohio gradually reopened starting in May 2020, with a mask mandate issued in July. DeWine resisted pressure from President Trump to fully reopen schools in fall 2020, leaving decisions to local districts while strongly encouraging masks and social distancing. Vaccination rollout began in December 2020; DeWine announced the "Vax-a-Million" lottery program in May 2021, which offered five $1 million prizes and college scholarships to vaccinated residents, significantly boosting uptake.
The pandemic dominated DeWine's first term, with Ohio ultimately recording over 20,000 deaths by the end of 2022.


===== 2021–2022: Recovery, redistricting, and social issues =====
With the pandemic receding, DeWine focused on economic recovery. The 2021–2023 biennial budget, signed in July 2021, included historic investments in broadband expansion, Appalachian development (via the "Ohio BUILDS" initiative), and water infrastructure. It also expanded the EdChoice voucher program and funded mental-health and addiction services.
DeWine signed major criminal-justice reforms, including a 2021 bill ending cash bail for most misdemeanors and low-level felonies and a 2022 "stand-your-ground" law that eliminated the duty to retreat, despite his earlier reservations about the latter.
Ohio's congressional and state-legislative redistricting process became highly contentious. The Ohio Redistricting Commission (controlled 5–2 by Republicans, including DeWine) passed seven consecutive legislative maps that were struck down by the Ohio Supreme Court for unconstitutional partisan gerrymandering. DeWine publicly acknowledged the final maps were unfair but voted for them anyway, drawing criticism from voting-rights advocates and praise from GOP legislators.
On social issues, DeWine signed one of the nation's most restrictive abortion bans (the "heartbeat bill") in 2019, which was blocked by courts and ultimately rendered moot after the 2023 constitutional amendment enshrining reproductive rights. He also signed legislation banning transgender girls from female school sports in 2022 and restricting gender-affirming care for minors in 2024 (overriding his own earlier veto of the latter).


===== 2022 election =====

DeWine and Husted were renominated in the May 2022 Republican primary, defeating challengers Joe Blystone and former congressman Jim Renacci. In the November general election, DeWine won re-election in a landslide, defeating Democratic nominee Nan Whaley 62.4% to 37.4%—the largest margin for a Republican gubernatorial candidate in Ohio since 1994.


==== Second term (2023–present) ====


===== 2023: East Palestine train derailment =====
On February 3, 2023, a Norfolk Southern freight train carrying hazardous materials derailed in East Palestine, prompting evacuations and concerns about vinyl chloride contamination. DeWine activated the Ohio National Guard, established a health clinic, and pressed the federal government for assistance. He visited the site repeatedly with EPA Administrator Michael Regan and later criticized Norfolk Southern for inadequate response, supporting bipartisan federal railway-safety legislation.


===== Economic development and infrastructure =====
DeWine's second term has emphasized large-scale economic projects:
The Intel semiconductor campus in Licking County, announced in January 2022 and celebrated with a 2024 groundbreaking, is expected to create 3,000 high-tech jobs and be the largest single private-sector investment in Ohio history.
Continued implementation of the $3 billion "Ohio BUILDS" water-infrastructure package and major Appalachian development funding.
Major transportation projects, including the Brent Spence Bridge corridor in Cincinnati and Cleveland lakefront redevelopment.


===== Education and workforce =====
DeWine launched the "OhioMeansJobs" initiative and expanded career-tech education. In 2023 he signed the "Backpack Bill," dramatically expanding the EdChoice private-school voucher program to universal eligibility.


===== 2024–2025 =====
In December 2023, DeWine vetoed House Bill 68, which would have banned gender-affirming care for minors and transgender girls from female sports, citing concerns over parental rights and medical decision-making. The legislature overrode the veto in January 2024, the first successful override of a DeWine veto.
In February 2025, DeWine issued an executive order requiring most state employees to return to in-person work full-time, ending widespread pandemic-era remote work policies. The order affected approximately 4,400 fully remote and 11,000 hybrid workers.
In August 2025, at the request of the federal government, DeWine deployed 150 Ohio National Guard troops to Washington, D.C., to support security operations during a declared crime emergency.


== Political positions ==


=== Abortion ===

In April 2019, DeWine signed House Bill 493, known as the Ohio "Heartbeat Bill", into law, prohibiting abortion after a heartbeat is detected in a fetus, with no exceptions for cases of rape and incest, imposing one of the nation's most extensive abortion restrictions. DeWine opposes abortion. In the Senate, he was the lead sponsor of the Unborn Victims of Violence Act and voted for the Partial Birth Abortion Ban Act in 2003. In December 2020, DeWine signed a bill that said "fetal remains from surgical abortions in Ohio must be cremated or buried"; failure to do so would be a misdemeanor of the first degree.
November 2023 Ohio Issue 1 overturned Ohio's abortion ban.


=== Capital punishment ===
Although Catholic, DeWine has not joined the Pope and Catholic bishops in opposing the death penalty. Nor has he joined former governor Robert Taft, former attorney general Petro, and former House speaker Householder in calling for an end to Ohio executions. Yet no executions have been conducted in Ohio since DeWine took office, and he has delayed executions due to "ongoing problems involving the willingness of pharmaceutical suppliers to provide drugs to the Ohio Department of Rehabilitation and Correction".


=== Gerrymandering ===
In 2021, DeWine signed a redistricting map that favored Republicans. The map gave Republicans an advantage in 12 out of 15 districts, leaving two safely Democratic districts and one toss-up district. The map passed the Ohio legislature without any support from Democrats. Voting rights advocates called on DeWine to veto the pro-Republican redistricting map. In 2018, Ohio voted in a referendum for anti-gerrymandering reform that encouraged bipartisan support for redistricting maps. The same year, DeWine pledged to honor the voters' wishes and support a redistricting process conducted in a bipartisan way, but in 2021 he approved the changes for 2022 onward.


=== Gun control ===

In Congress, DeWine was known for his support for gun control measures. In 2004, he cosponsored an amendment to renew the Federal Assault Weapons Ban. He has repeatedly received an "F" rating from the National Rifle Association. The National Rifle Association endorsed him for governor. DeWine was one of only two Republican senators to vote against the Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act, which banned lawsuits against gun manufacturers, distributors and dealers for criminal misuse of their products. In the 2006 election cycle, DeWine was the first senatorial candidate to be endorsed by the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence; he displayed the endorsement on his campaign webpage. In 2019, DeWine proposed a red flag law for Ohio that would allow courts to take guns from people seen as a threats to others or themselves. In January 2021, he signed into law a bill that removed the requirement to attempt to retreat before shooting in self-defense, and in March 2022 he signed a bill into law removing the requirement to possess a license to carry a concealed handgun in public.


=== Highway safety ===
As U.S. senator, DeWine joined a bipartisan effort to lower the national maximum blood-alcohol limit from .1% to .08% and to require reporting of vehicle-related deaths on private property like parking lots and driveways. He sponsored legislation on determining when aging tires become unsafe.


=== LGBTQ+ rights ===
DeWine opposes same-sex marriage and as a U.S. senator voted for the Defense of Marriage Act, which bars federal recognition of same-sex marriage and allows states to refuse to recognize such marriages performed in other states, and sponsored the Federal Marriage Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which would have banned same-sex marriage. He argued in the Supreme Court in favor of bans on same-sex marriage, saying that such bans infringe on "no fundamental right" and that states should not have to recognize same-sex couples who married in other states. DeWine was acting as attorney general against Jim Obergefell in the case Obergefell v. Hodges. The Supreme Court issued a landmark ruling against DeWine and other defendants, finding same-sex marriage bans unconstitutional.
In 2021, DeWine opposed a bill that would have banned transgender athletes from playing on sports teams that do not match their sex at birth, saying, "This issue is best addressed outside of government, through individual sports leagues and athletic associations, including the Ohio High School Athletic Association, who can tailor policies to meet the needs of their member athletes and member institutions." In December 2023, he vetoed a bill that would have banned minors from receiving gender-affirming care in Ohio and transgender youth from playing on sports teams that did not match their sex assigned at birth. He said that if the bill became law, "Ohio would be saying that the state—that the government knows better what is medically best for a child than the two people who love that child the most, their parents." In January 2024, the Republican-dominated legislature overrode DeWine's veto of the gender-affirming care ban. Also in January 2024, DeWine signed an executive order that restricted gender-affirming surgery for youth while also proposing new administrative rules focused on transgender youth and adults. In February 2024, after backlash from trans people and healthcare providers, DeWine's administration dropped all the proposed rules to restrict treatment for transgender adults. In November 2024, DeWine signed into law a bill prohibiting students in public schools from using restrooms other than those for the gender they were assigned at birth.


=== Marijuana ===
In 2019, DeWine said: "it would really be a mistake for Ohio, by legislation, to say that marijuana for adults is just OK." In February 2020, NORML, a group advocating the legalization of marijuana, gave DeWine an "F" rating in relation to his policies. He opposed 2023 Ohio Issue 2, the "Regulate Marijuana Like Alcohol initiative". In 2024, DeWine requested lawmakers take action against Delta 8.


=== Hamas-Israel war campus protests ===

After the April 25, 2024, Ohio State University Gaza Solidarity Encampment resulted in at least 36 arrests of pro-Palestinian demonstrators, including 16 Ohio State University students, DeWine said, "I think that Ohio State did well", "what we don't want is any kind of hate", and that he opposes protests "right outside the door of a classroom". The demonstrators at the encampment were on the South Oval, which is not in the vicinity of any classrooms. DeWine also said he supported the arrests at Ohio State in the form of Ohio State Highway Patrol, which included an officer who aimed a rifle at protesters during the encampment's dispersal. He said that he supports Ohio and the U.S. "backing the country of Israel". In the same interview, he expressed support for Ohio Revised Code Section 9.76, which legally prohibits Ohio State from boycotting or divesting from companies on the basis of their support for Israel.


=== Other ===
In 2020, DeWine signed a bill that forbids colleges and universities in Ohio blocking controversial speakers. The same year, DeWine's compensation was 17th among state governors, at $159,189, compared to a maximum of $225,000 for the governor of New York and a minimum of $70,000 for the governor of Maine. The Ohio Checkbook shows that 92 employees of the Ohio state teachers retirement system, including director William Neville, equal or exceed the governor's salary.


== Personal life ==
DeWine lives in the Whitelaw Reid House. He married Frances Struewing on June 3, 1967, and they have had eight children together. Their daughter Rebecca died at the age of 22 on August 4, 1993, in a car accident. One of their sons, Pat DeWine, is an Ohio Supreme Court Justice. Another son, Brian, is the president of the Minor League Baseball team the Asheville Tourists; the DeWine family purchased the team in 2010. DeWine's second cousin, Kevin DeWine, is the former Ohio Republican Party chairman.


== Electoral history ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Campaign website at the Wayback Machine (archived 2023-02-14)

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Appearances on C-SPAN