Musixmatch is an Italian music data company and platform for users to search and share song lyrics with translations. Musixmatch has 80 million users (50 million active users), 12 million songs with their respective lyrics, and 115+ employees.
In 2022, Musixmatch launched Musixmatch Podcasts, a platform for transcription that uses artificial intelligence and community.


== Overview ==
Musixmatch's mobile app displays lyrics synchronized with the music being played. Its native apps can scan all the songs in a user's music library, find lyrics, and be used as a music player.


=== Features ===
In October 2022, Musixmatch launched Podcast, a platform that generates transcription every day for podcast episodes across different topics and charts, using its NLP base model architecture, Umberto, to tag keywords such as places, people and topics that are linked to topics on Wikipedia.


== History ==
Musixmatch was originally conceived in early 2007 by Massimo Ciociola, who later founded the company in 2010 in Bologna with Francesco Delfino, Giuseppe Costantino and Gianluca Delli Carri.
Musixmatch went live in July 2010, and by January 2015 had raised US$14.1 million in angel and venture capital funding. Musixmatch has signed agreements with publishers such as EMI Publishing, Warner/Chappell Music, Universal Music Publishing, Sony ATV, Kobalt, Peer Music and Disney Music.
The company provided Spotify's lyrics user interface on Spotify Desktop until this service was discontinued in May 2016, and again after November 2019 in certain regions. As of November 2021, this feature is available worldwide.
In April 2016, Musixmatch partnered with Apple Music to provide lyrics, including word-synced lyrics.
In June 2019, Musixmatch launched a partnership with Instagram, allowing all users to add Lyrics Stickers to any Instagram Music Story.
In September 2019, Marco Paglia, a Senior Product Director at Uber with past experience at Google, YouTube, Nokia, joined Musixmatch as Chief Product Officer.
In July 2022, Musixmatch announced a strategic significant investment from TPG. As part of the deal, David Trujillo and Jacqui Hawwa joined the Musixmatch's board of directors. At that time, Gianluca delli Carri left the company to pursue his personal goals.
In February 2022 Giuseppe Costantino left the company to pursue his personal goals although remaining an investor.
On November 30, 2023, Musixmatch announced the appointment of Rio Caraeff, the former Founder and CEO of Vevo, as its Chief Business Officer 
In May 2024, Musixmatch implemented new verification requirements for users contributing lyrics to the platform. The company began requiring all contributors to upload a selfie with a valid government-issued photo ID before being allowed to add new lyrics. This requirement applied to both new users and previously verified artists who had been contributing to the platform.
On November 4, 2024, Musixmatch announced the appointment of Marco Paglia and Rio Caraeff as co-presidents, marking a significant leadership milestone for the company 
On March 5, 2025, Canadian rival comppetitor LyricFind filed an antitrust lawsuit against Musixmatch and its private equity owner TPG Growth through the United States District Court for the Northern District of California. In the document, LyricFind accused Musixmatch of eight federal antitrust violations and five state law claims after the latter service signed an exclusive partnership with Warner Chappell Music.


== See also ==
Genius


== References ==