Oggy and the Cockroaches (French: Oggy et les Cafards) is a French animated television series created by Jean-Yves Raimbaud and produced by Gaumont Multimedia for seasons 1–2 (in co-production with Les Productions Coquerelles for season 2) and Xilam Animation for seasons 3–7. It chronicles the comedic exploits and burlesque adventures of a rotund, blue cat named Oggy, whose days are always ruined by three cockroaches – Joey, Marky, and Dee Dee respectively – who regularly cause mischief at his home. The show employs the use of silent comedy, with characters not speaking and using unintelligible gibberish vocalizations, gestures, facial expressions, sound effects and sardonic laughter to communicate. Complex sequences (presenting a scene or context) are illustrated with images, sometimes in written text, speech balloons, or pictograms.
The series premiered in September 1998 on France 3, and was licensed internationally in over 190 territories. It ended in January 2019, having released seven seasons and 169 half-hour episodes (501 seven-to-fourteen-minute segments) in over two decades to date. The cartoon relies on slapstick humour, much like its inspiration Tom and Jerry; although traditional slapstick cartoon characters prefer dropping anvils and pianos on each other, Oggy and the Cockroaches sometimes uses atomic bombs or submarines.
In September 2020, a reboot series was announced, entitled Oggy and the Cockroaches: Next Generation, in which Oggy takes care of Piya, a young elephant from India. It was released worldwide on Netflix on 28 July 2022. Although it differs noticeably from the original series in terms of its visuals and tone, Gulli labels it as Oggy's eighth season. In 2021, a spin-off, Oggy Oggy, was released, focusing on the adventures of a kitten version of Oggy without the cockroaches.


== Premise ==
Oggy, an anthropomorphic cat, spends his days watching television, lounging around and eating, but is continually pestered and annoyed by three cockroaches (Joey, Marky, and Dee Dee) in his house, whose endgoal is to obtain absolute control of Oggy's house through any means. The roaches' slapstick mischief ranges from plundering Oggy's refrigerator (mostly) to hijacking the train he just boarded. In many situations, Oggy is also helped by his cousin, Jack, who is more violent and short-tempered than him and is also annoyed by the cockroaches. Other recurring characters include Bob, a short-tempered bulldog and Oggy's neighbor, and Olivia, a female cat who becomes Oggy's love interest.
The fifth season loosely utilises ideas from Oggy and the Cockroaches: The Movie which covers the adventures of Oggy, cockroaches, Jack, Bob and Olivia throughout various time periods. In no particular order, each series has a topic, based on an important place and time in history (e.g. Series 1 covers Ancient Egypt and Series 5 covers the Middle Ages) or a story with historical significance (e.g. Series 23 focuses on the Greek epic poem Odyssey by Homer and Series 26 focuses on the legend of King Arthur).


== Episodes ==


== Characters ==


=== Main ===
Oggy is a placid, solitary, homebody, unlucky cat with a light blue body, green eyes, red nose, white gloves, portly figure, grey tummy and white feet. Oggy also has a black "cap" (shaped to include his ears) over the top of his head. Oggy usually spends his time either watching TV, doing housework, gardening, cooking, eating or trying to woo over Olivia, when he's not chasing and battling his archenemies, the cockroaches; he occasionally enjoys company to engage in various activities, preferably quiet ones. He is quite sentimental and easily takes to creatures in distress. Oggy's greatest desire in life is food, and the cockroaches are the only thing in his way. His lazy, simple-minded nature amuses the cockroaches, but he is heroic and not one to be underestimated. Despite the constant mayhem caused by the roaches, Oggy has a love–hate relationship with them, having lived with them for a long time. Whenever he finds himself alone in his house, he will begin to miss the roaches along with their pranks (as seen in the season 3 episode "Priceless Roaches" and the season 1 episode "So Lonely"/"Alone at Last"), followed by nothing interesting happening in his life. According to executive producer Marc du Pontavice and France Info, Oggy was named after punk rock musician Iggy Pop and the rock album The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars (1972). In the first three seasons, Oggy, like his Tom and Jerry counterpart, was the main punching bag in the series, though this was phased out somewhat in the fourth and fifth seasons. He also has a fear of heights, as shown in "The Rise and the Fall" and its season 7 remake "Vertigo!" – however, it only applied for Jack's construction site. He has a great and long ancestry spanning back to the very beginning of time, which is explored in the movie and the fifth season.
The Cockroaches are a trio of hedonistic, sadistic and problematic cockroaches named Joey, Marky, and Dee Dee (who are implied to be named after members of the rock band Ramones). They mainly love antagonizing, playing tricks on, harassing, tormenting and mangling Oggy and Jack (or any other victim within reach) and using extreme measures to put an end to them, and indulge in their passionately destructive mayhem without visible remorse. However, if the cats were to leave, they would miss each other, as seen in "Moving Out". They also occasionally stop fighting with Oggy long enough to team up and get rid of a common intruder (Jack in "The Dictator"/"General Jack" and "Life's a Beach"/"Oggy's Beach Club", Bob in some episodes or other miscellaneous enemies) in exchange for something (usually food or money). The cockroaches have wide heads, vibrantly-colored sclerae with long, pointy black noses, black feet and imposing bodies of about 10 to 15 centimeters tall. They also have black "caps" with their antennae, like Oggy, and gloves. They live behind a dirty-looking vent (the location of which changes depending on the episode) in Oggy's house. While most episodes generally focus on the cockroaches, in some episodes, the three cockroaches don't appear simultaneously; they don't even appear altogether in "The Pumpkin That Pretended to Be a Ferrari"/"At the Stroke of Midnight".
Joey (born 15 June 1991) is the smallest cockroach with a purple-pink body, pink right eye (originally red), a yellow left eye, and a lavender head. Aggressive, Machiavellian, and mercenary, even though he is the shortest roach in the group, he is doubtlessly the leader, and the most intelligent, always being the brains for their plans – but is sometimes rejected and forced to go alone, because Marky and Dee Dee often think that his ideas are stupid. He also loves money (which is shown in several episodes such as "Saturday Black Fever"/"The Black Gold Rush" and "Mister Cat"), but his efforts always fall short, usually ending with him getting swatted or beaten up. He often drags his friends into shady dealings, hatching plans to serve his goals or to get himself out of a sticky situation, and has a bit of a dictator mentality. While he also has a black "cap" with his antennae, like Oggy and the other roaches, it was originally lavender, as seen in "Bitter Chocolate" and "It's All Under Control", but was changed in the remakes. He is named after lead singer Joey Ramone.
Marky is the tallest cockroach with a silver body, green head and pink eyes (originally red). Although Marky originally used to love mischief, pranks and annoying Oggy in pretty much every possible way (just like Dee Dee and Joey), he has grown to be more laid-back as the series progressed and has a more generic role. In most episodes, he is shown with Dee Dee as his dim-witted partner-in-crime, often teaming with him when Joey gets just a bit too authoritarian. He sometimes is a hopeless romantic-type (as seen in "Jealousy" and "Baby Doll"/"Doll Idol"), his hobbies consist of dating puppets, parties and (ostensibly) reading books (the latter of which is never shown), and he never hesitates to charm any female (doll, insect, or woman alike) that catches his eye. He also has bad breath, as revealed in "It's a Small World"/"Itsy-Bitsy Oggy". While his eye color changed, they turn red again at one point in "Teleportation". He is named after drummer Marky Ramone.
Dee Dee is the youngest cockroach with a dark, overweight blue body, orange head and green eyes. Burly, jovial, reckless, immature, easily swayed and always hungry, his gluttonous appetite sometimes reaches insane proportions, often resulting in the consumption of larger animals or other things that would otherwise be inedible (such as hyenas and elephants in one case and, due to the effects of a poisonous mushroom in another case, an insect; other instances include the fish on the wallpaper in "Oggy's Clone"/"Oggy's Costume", a clownfish in "Scuba Diving", and the kitchen fridge in multiple episodes). He is known to like opera in "A Night at the Opera"/"Oggy at the Opera", wanting to publicly perform on-stage. Sometimes it is shown that his feet are so foul-smelling that the juice they produce is toxic and can melt objects, as seen in "Caught in a Trap"/"High Security Fridge". He is named after bassist Dee Dee Ramone.


=== Secondary ===
Jack is a cat with an olive green body, yellow eyes, a red nose, a pale pink stomach, and white feet, and Oggy's cousin. In contrast to Oggy, he is more strong-willed, short-tempered, bossy, violent, arrogant and strictly authoritarian than him. He can be seen as greedy, as shown in a few episodes where he goes against or teams up with Oggy for money or satiating his own pathological egomania. He often finds himself inventing and building huge machinery, such as roach-catching contraptions, and is very interested in physics, chemistry and science, though this was phased out in later seasons. He is also fond of boisterous activities (war games, skiing, etc.) and powerful machines. He is also very enterprising, self-assured, prideful and doesn't hesitate to show off his own delusions of grandeur. Despite his differing personality causing him and Oggy to sometimes clash and quarrel, they have an excellent, loving relationship, particularly in the episode "Happy Birthday" where he tries to stop Oggy from committing suicide. Jack mostly visits (and occasionally sleeps at) Oggy's house to protect the both of them from the cockroaches' pestering, and owns a green jeep in which he and Oggy (along with the cockroaches who irritate both of them in all their journeys) go for a variety of journeys, and in mundane cases for trips to the beach or going fishing. He lives in a house in the neighborhood that is ordinary on the outside, but covered in artificial animal skins (zebra, leopard, etc.) on the inside—especially in the living room. He is sometimes seen trying to propose to Oggy's sister Monica, but the cockroaches' pranks always stop it. In one episode ("Don't Rock the Cradle!"/"Oggy the Babysitter"), Jack and Monica seem to have a baby together and ask Oggy to babysit their child. In "Just Married!", Jack plans to marry a poodle, but it got cancelled due to the cockroaches sneaking in and causing trouble.
Bob is a fiercely antagonistic, brutish, quick-tempered brown bulldog and Oggy's neighbor (since the series' continuity is constantly shifting, his rather ordinary house changes position relative to Oggy's as the story needs to). He is an unfriendly loner who enjoys quiet or refined hobbies (gardening, ballet, etc.). Behind this wall of indifference hides an individual who has violent anger issues and will retaliate against any perceived violation of his privacy. He also has a knack for always being in the wrong place at the wrong time, which often makes him the victim of numerous mishaps throughout the series and leads him to react rather brutally – when Oggy, Jack or the cockroaches accidentally irritate him (e.g. crushing him, shaving his fur or destroying his home), he usually pummels Oggy or Jack offscreen, invariably emerging victorious from his battles. Despite this, depending on the circumstances, he can be an ally of Oggy and Jack; he gets along fairly well with them and Olivia in seasons 4 and 5, forming some sort of friendship with them and learning to view them as beyond pains and nuisances, as notably seen in the episodes "Olivia", "Steamed Out!", "Oggy Splits Hairs", and "Back to the Past!". Even though Bob is tough, he also has a sociable and even comically sensitive side, as shown in "Oggy's Teddy Bear", where it's also revealed he's a toy collector. In addition, Bob also works as a police officer in several episodes (such as "Dee Dee Capone") and a teacher in one ("Back to School"). He debuted in the season 1 episode "The Lottery Ticket".
Olivia is a white cat with a yellow bow on her head, a pink nose, and light blue eyes. She first appears in the fourth season as Oggy's love interest, having settled in a house near him, Jack and Bob. Olivia is happy-go-lucky and polite, being fond of nature and finding any sort of opportunity for fun and befriending people. In spite of her optimistic outlook, she is aware of the cockroaches' mischief, so she sometimes stops them when they are around by using aggressive methods (in "Oggy and the Not-So-Smart Bracelet", she outright retaliates at Marky). However, she is also friends with the cockroaches (as seen in "Oggy Goes Green!" and "Un(Happy) Camper!"). Olivia also cares a lot about her appearance, as seen in the episode "Olivia's Pimple", where she refuses to leave her house when she sees a pimple on her face. In "Oggy Is Getting Married!", as the episode's title implies, Olivia and Oggy marry after a wild, adventurous trip to Venice, Italy marred by the cockroaches' antics. However, their life after said marriage is not frequently shown later in the series.


=== Other ===
Oggy's Grandma is Oggy's decrepit and geriatric grandmother and the least-known member of his family who appears in several episodes, including "Granny's Day" and "Oggy's Grandma" (where she appears to be very strict with Oggy's mannerisms). She also makes a cameo in "Deep Trouble" where she supports Oggy and Jack, along with Monica. In "Granny's Day", she decides to actually kill the roaches, but eventually spares the cockroaches at the end after seeing Dee Dee's despair with the situation. She is then attacked by them in "Oggy's Grandma", once getting her head flattened by the lid of Oggy's toilet. She also gets frequent, short-lasting bursts of energy from coffee, which aids her in defeating the roaches. In "Granny's Day", she successfully captures Joey and Marky – but later feels sympathy for them when Dee Dee cries on a picture of the trio, with the other two crossed out.
Monica is Oggy's twin sister and Jack's love interest, the latter of whom she has a child with in "Don't Rock the Cradle!"/"Oggy the Babysitter". She debuted in the season 2 episode "Love & Kisses", where she accidentally kisses Jack and he falls in love with her. Jack's attempts to propose to Monica are always stopped by the cockroaches' pranks. Monica and Oggy resemble each other as they are twins, albeit with a lighter fur, a yellow bandana, and light pink stomach. She wears gloves and pink roller skates with green lines on them. Monica also has an oblong-shaped tail. Monica often visits Oggy's house. A sporty tomboy compared to Oggy, she's known for being active and taking on physical challenges such as sky diving and bungee jumping. She sometimes is seen rollerskating, and wears a pair of them casually. Out of all the characters, Monica appears the least – however, she makes a brief cameo in "Oggy Is Getting Married!", where she sits next to Bob. She later plays a major role as Olivia's rival in the episode "Sharing Oggy", although they later become friends. Monica also likes playing with Jack and is stronger than him as shown in season 7 episode "Extreme Indoor Sports" where she also beat cockroaches. In the episode "Sitcom"/"The Laugh Box", she was angry with Jack and destroys some things in Oggy's house. Monica also never cries, unlike Olivia or Oggy. In Season 3, Monica wears a pink skirt and pink Mary Jane shoes.
Lady K is a light yellow female cockroach who debuted in the episode of the same name (also in the fourth season), as the cockroaches' new love interest (mainly Joey's) – to which she takes advantage of. She lives in Olivia's house (which Olivia is not aware of), and hates her for unknown reasons. She frequently attempts to use the cockroaches as her pawns to get what she wants or her job done.
Pit is a gray dog living in the same neighborhood as Oggy, who debuted in the fourth season. Like Bob, he is also strong.
Bobette is Bob's daughter who debuted in the fifth season. She is Jack's love interest, as seen in the episodes "Marky's Tournament" (where Marky also had a crush on her) and "Jackromeo and Bobette". She is seen in the episode "Emperor for a Day" as Napoleon's love interest.
The Policeman is an unnamed human policeman (this is a universe where humans and anthropomorphic animals inhabit, evolve and interact in the same universe) who is normally seen in traffic, or sometimes wherever Oggy has traveled to. Sometimes Oggy or Jack accidentally annoy him, due to the cockroaches' mischief. He appears in every season, except for the fifth.
The Doctor is an unnamed human doctor who sometimes visits Oggy's house when Oggy gets sick, or in other cases, when another character (like Jack) assumes Oggy has gone mad. He sometimes wears a nurse's outfit. In the episode "A Dog Day's Afternoon"/"Cute Little Puppy", it is revealed that he has a pet puppy (which Oggy took care of). He is also shown in "Missing in Action"/"Where's the Exit?" as an artist (specifically, a painter). The Doctor is absent in season 5.
The Witch is an unnamed female human witch who has a black coat, dress and magic hat who appears as a minor character in several seasons 3 and 4 episodes, like the episode "Inside Out", in which her magical telescope falls into Oggy's house, and also in "The Magic Pen" (in which her magical pencil falls into Oggy's house yard) and "Back to the Past!" (in which she turns Oggy, Jack and Bob into babies after the cockroaches blame them accidentally destroying her hat on them). She is bald, has gray hair and always lives with an attitude. In season 7, the witch gets a redesign, which reuses Miss Cleo the Witch Impersonator's design from Space Goofs.
Oggy's Ex-Girlfriend is an unnamed human female character who debuted in the season 1 episode "Jealousy" and was Oggy's first love before Olivia. She has tan skin with long curly or wavy black hair. In contrast to other characters, she has small pink lips and small, simple-looking eyes. She wears a dark purple dress and matching high heels. In "Jealousy", she and Oggy break up at the end because Marky made Oggy jealous and as such, the latter kicks her out of his house. She is shown to be dating another guy in the episode "Oggy's Night Out"/"What's on the Menu?"; however, she briefly gets back together with Oggy in the season 2 episode "The Joker Joked" (in its remastered season 6 version, "Abracadabra", she is replaced by Olivia). She also appears on several billboards in Oggy's area.
Some of the characters cameo in Xilam's other series, such as Zig & Sharko and The Daltons (in Joe's dream in "The Secret Passage"), and in the film Go West! A Lucky Luke Adventure (2007). The eponymous characters make their debut in the Space Goofs episode "Venus Junior", where they are seen on the aliens' television (before the pilot episode was officially posted online, in 2016). In the second season, the episode "Space Sailors" has a gag where the roaches greet Etno (in the aliens' now-flooded house) as they row by. Oggy, the roaches and Jack appear as drawings in "Doodle", Oggy can be seen on a page of a book during "Madame Zelza", a minor character (a large, fat woman with a bobcut) and her pet poodle appear in the episode "Get Off My Couch!". and Oggy and Monica make a cameo in the episode "The Alien Show".


== Production ==
The project dates back to 1997; shortly after the success of Space Goofs, Marc du Pontavice approached Jean‑Yves Raimbaud with a specific creative brief: "think about what Tom and Jerry would look like in the year 2000." Raimbaud responded by designing a blue cat (later named Oggy) and replacing the classic mouse with three mischievous cockroaches—effectively inverting the usual predator-prey dynamic, and thus Oggy and the Cockroaches was created. The show was meant to "counter the surge of superheroes, manga and Franco-Belgian comic book heroes." After the death of Raimbaud, Olivier Jean-Marie, director of the series, decided not to modify the design of Oggy, in particular his blue color. The first name of each of the three cockroaches, Joey, Dee Dee and Marky, refers to three of the members of the punk rock group called the Ramones. Oggy, for his part, owes his first name to the famous singer Iggy Pop as well as the character of Ziggy Stardust created by David Bowie. Iggy Pop also sang for the theme song of Space Goofs. The first season cost approximately 9 million euros to produce, with production costs subsequently decreasing in later seasons.
After the second season, a third and fourth season were commissioned somewhat later, in early 2008 and 2011 respectively, following the first two seasons' meteoric rise to international success. Additional characters were introduced, octopuses and fish, whilst the setting and main characters received updates and changes to their background, designs, voices, sounds, facial expressions, and soundtracks. After a four-year gap in production, season 5 was released in mid-2017 with two more seasons coming later. Season 6 episodes began airing on K2, while Season 5 was previewed on Gulli. Due to Le Bars' passing, some new audio for Oggy and the cockroach trio was recorded for seasons 5–7 – the voice actor currently remains unknown.
The issue of female representation in the series during the early seasons was seen as very stereotypical, which the Xilam studio considered disturbing due to some countries' opposition to it. It only improved in recent seasons with the introduction of Oggy's girlfriend-turned-wife, Olivia, in the fourth season, who is a strong and charismatic woman. When asked about his favorite episode, Marc du Pontavice said it's the last one he worked on for the show.
Oggy and the Cockroaches was produced with the participation of Le centre national de la cinématographie (seasons 1–3, 5–7), France 3 (seasons 1–2), ProSieben (season 1), TPS Cinéma (season 2), Telefilm Canada (season 2), Gouvernement du Québec (season 2), Programme de credit d'impôt (season 2), The Government of Canada (season 2), Canadian Film or Video Production Tax Credit Program (season 2), France Télévisions (season 4), Canal+ (season 4), Télétoon+ (season 4) Gulli (seasons 5–7), Canal J (seasons 5–7), and Cartoon Network (seasons 5–7), in association with Canal+ (season 3), Cofanim-Backup Films (seasons 3–4), Sofitvciné 4 (seasons 5–7), A Plus Image 7 (seasons 5–7), Indéfilms 5 (seasons 5–7), and Cofinova 13 (seasons 5–7), and the support of the MEDIA Programme of the European Union (season 3), CNC (season 4), Sofitvcine 4 (seasons 5–7), A Plus Image 7 (seasons 5–7), Indéfilms 5 (seasons 5–7), Cofinova 13 (seasons 5–7), and Pôle Image Magelis (seasons 6–7).


=== Music ===
Throughout the first four seasons, Hugues Le Bars composes the series' music. Hervé Lavandier, the composer of Space Goofs, only composed the music for the first and second seasons. Starting with the fifth season, Vincent Artaud, who was a composer on other Xilam titles like the second through fourth seasons of Zig & Sharko, Hubert & Takako, and FloopaLoo, Where Are You?, replaced Le Bars as the composer for the show. Some of the music composed by Artaud are rearranged versions of the score from Oggy and the Cockroaches: The Movie.


== Broadcast ==
Oggy and the Cockroaches originated from France, and the series originally aired on France 3 through the network's Les Minikeums block (seasons 1 and 2 with reruns of seasons 3 and 4), Canal+ Family (seasons 3 and 4), and Gulli (seasons 5 to 7, who also reran older episodes from November 2005 to 2010 on the GRRR!!!, GulliGulli, GulliGang and GulliGood blocks), being key to the channel's successful launch and one of its most popular shows, with reruns airing on other French networks like Canal J, Canal+, Télétoon+, France 4, Boomerang and TiJi. The series is watched by over 800 million households worldwide via linear TV and SVOD platforms, such as Netflix and Amazon Prime Video.
In the Philippines, the series aired on TV5 in 2010, and ABS-CBN from 2010 to 2020. In late 2011, it was welcomed to Cartoon Network's line-up and adored by the channel, and aired until 2022 due to the said show being one of the network's top-viewed programs. It moved to GMA Network on 3 September 2022, under the network's Astig Authority Saturday morning block.
In Southeast Asia, season 3 of the series was broadcast on Disney Channel and Disney XD from 2009 to 31 December 2013. Seasons 1 to 5 were broadcast on the local Cartoon Network from late 2010 to 2017, and seasons 4 to 7 from 2017 to 2022. Seasons 1 to 4 were broadcast on Nickelodeon from 2015 to April 2021.
In Arabian countries, it aired on Ajyal TV, MBC3, and Basma Channel. It also airs on 2M in Morocco, local Tunisian channels (i.e. Tunis 7), Saudi 2 in Saudi Arabia, Dubai One in the United Arab Emirates, and Gulli Arabic.
In Italy, it was broadcast on Italia 1, Hiro, Boing, K2, Frisbee, DeA Kids, and Mediaset (in K2 and Frisbee, it also has a growing consumer products range across all major categories, including toys).
It also aired in India from 2009 to 2012 on Nickelodeon. On 16 July 2012, the series was acquired by Cartoon Network, which broadcast a Telugu audio track of the show featuring dialogue, a narrator, Bollywood-style references, and character localization, airing it hours each day until its fourth season. In 2015, Nickelodeon started rebroadcasting the show's older episodes, from seasons 1 to 3. Later, on 21 October of the same year, the series was also picked up by Nickelodeon Sonic, which broadcast the same seasons as Nick. Season 5 started airing on Cartoon Network from 14 August 2017. Seasons 3, 6 and 7 aired later during 2018–19, on Cartoon Network India. In August 2020, Sonic Nickelodeon started airing Hindi, Kannada and Tamil audio track of season 4 again. Cartoon Network aired seasons 5 to 7 until March 2022. In October 2021, Sony YAY! took over the rights for all seven seasons.
In the United States, it aired on Fox Kids from 12 September 1998 to 5 March 1999. Nickelodeon began airing the series on 23 February 2015 until March of that same year. The show later aired on KidsClick from 2018 until the block's discontinuation in 2019.
In the United Kingdom, in August 2008, Galleon Ent., a U.K.-based intellectual property owner and developer of family entertainment properties, signed an agreement to represent all licensing rights to children's properties A Kind of Magic, Oggy and the Cockroaches and Rahan: Son of the Dark Age.
In Latin America, in April 2019, Ecuadorian public broadcaster TC Ecuador picked up Zig & Sharko, A Kind of Magic, and seasons 3 to 7 of Oggy and the Cockroaches. The trio of shows launched on the channel over the coming year. The deal expanded Xilam's rapidly growing presence in Latin America, where the studio's first preschool series, Paprika, premiered last October on Disney Junior across the region.
It has also aired on Kids Channel in Mauritius, Pop, Nicktoons, CITV and RTÉ One in the United Kingdom and Ireland, Boomerang and ABC3 in Australia, MTV Sub, Nelonen and MTV Oy in Finland, Markíza in Slovakia, Tring Tring and Vizion Plus in Albania, ProSieben Maxx, CineStar, Super RTL and Disney Channel in Germany (the latter also in Austria and Switzerland), TV3 (the latter also in Latvia), NTV7 and Awesome TV in Malaysia, PLUSPLUS in Ukraine, SIC in Portugal, LNK in Lithuania, Citytv in Colombia, YTV in Canada, Spacetoon Indonesia in Indonesia, ProSieben, RTL 7 in the Netherlands, Barnkanalen in Sweden, Federalna televizija in Bosnia and Herzegovina, IRIB TV2 and IRIB Nahal in Iran, ARB Günəş in Azerbaijan, Pop in Slovenia, Nova Fun in the Czech Republic, Arutz HaYeladim and Noga in Israel, Kanal 2 in Estonia, TVB in Hong Kong, Smile TV and Alter Channel in Greece, Fantastic in Poland, TPH Club and K3 in Spain, Kohavision in Kosovo, ABC Kids in Australia, RTBF and VRT in Belgium, UYoung in China, VIAPLAY in the Baltic states, Carousel in Russia, and TC Ecuador in Ecuador.


=== Distribution ===
On 24 October 2014, the official YouTube channel for Oggy and the Cockroaches was created, with all of the episodes – in a high-quality, widescreen format – from seasons 1 to 7. The channel has also made various compilations and episodes with English title cards. As of November 2025, the channel has 13 million subscribers, making it one of the top 10 most-subscribed French channels on the site. As of November 2025, "The Magic Pen" ("Crayon Magique") (the 14th episode of the fourth season) is the most-viewed episode on the official channel, with over 182 million views. The most-viewed compilation has 121 million views.
By 2017, the series netted over 2 billion YouTube views each year, in addition to boasting 3.8 million fans and followers on Facebook by 2019, Instagram, Pinterest, etc.


== Media ==


=== Home media ===
Five DVDs came out in 2003 in the United States, with 12 episodes each. In 2005, several VHSs were released in New York City.
On 8 October 2008, a French DVD box set of the complete first season, plus the pilot and the episode "Working Cat", was released. On 6 September 2010, three French DVD box sets of the complete first, second, and third seasons were made available. In July 2011, a French DVD box set containing all episodes from seasons 1, 2 and 3 became available. Seasons 4 to 7 are yet to be available. Multiple VHSs were sold in Italy.


=== Magazine ===
A magazine called Oggy et les Cafards, le mag came out in France in 2009 (two issues), then again in 2011.

n°1: 11 July 2009
n°2: 21 October 2009
n°3: 14 January 2011


=== Music ===
A music album titled Oggy et les Cafards: Le Show du Chat was released in France on CD and for digital download on 6 September 2010 under the Sony Music Entertainment label.


=== Comics ===
A French comic series adapted from the series first started out in 2010. It is published by Dargaud, written by Diego Aranega, and drawn and colourised by Frévin, also known as Sylvain Frécon. Aranega was awarded the Bulle d'Or for his work on the series in 2011.

16 April 2010: Plouf, prouf, vrooo !
5 November 2010: Crac, boum, miaouuuuu !
23 September 2011: Bip...bip...bip...
An American comic was planned to be released in summer 2019. The first issue was released on 11 December 2019, after being delayed two times. It is published by American Mythology Productions. The comic was released on a bi-monthly schedule, but was on a hiatus for four months after two issues were published due to the COVID-19 pandemic's effect on the comic book industry. Issue #3 was published on 24 June 2020. It is currently on hiatus as of 23 October 2020.


=== CD drama ===
A CD drama, Oggy et les Cafards Volume 1, was released in France on CD and for digital download in October 2012. It contains narrations of five episodes by Anthony Kavanagh.


=== Film ===

The film Oggy and the Cockroaches: The Movie (originally Oggy et les Cafards, Le Film) was announced in 2012, and released to theatres on 7 August 2013. This feature film has four segments, prehistoric era "Oggy Magnon", Middle Ages "Prince Oggy II", 19th-century London "Jack Holmes", and futuristic "Oggy-Wan Kenoggy", the latter of which is a CGI segment.


=== Cancelled video game ===
A video game adaptation for the Game Boy Advance based on the television show was announced in 2004 and planned and developed by Xilam. The game was present at E3 2004, where footage was shown as it being a 2D platformer, and it was scheduled for release months later in Q3 2004, but the game was cancelled and never materialized for unknown reasons.


=== Spin-off ===

Oggy Oggy, which centers on a kitten version of Oggy, free from the tyrannical mayhem of the roaches, was released on 24 August 2021. It is CG-animated. The series was launched during Xilam's second Virtual Showcase event for TV channel and platform commissioners and buyers, which ran from 7 to 9 April 2021, and on Netflix in August 2021, and is the first French Netflix original series.


=== Reboot ===

Like the original series, it focuses on the wacky antics of Oggy and the trio of mischievous cockroaches that inhabit his house. This reboot also has Oggy taking care of Piya, a young, seven-year-old elephant from India who is the daughter of Oggy's Indian friends, whom he is looking after during their holiday.


=== Statue ===
In December 2019, to commemorate the series' 20th anniversary, the characters were included in the Musée Grévin.


=== Merchandise ===
Oggy and the Cockroaches products, such as plush toys, clothing, furniture, board games, luggage, flip-flops, sneakers, slippers, underwear, leisurewear, sleepwear, puzzles, educational games, card games, notebooks, diaries, address books, notebooks, labels, timetables, binders, organizers, and exercise books, among other items, have been marketed by such companies such as Corner Design, the Royer Group, Blues Filobranca, TF1 Games, and the Hamelin Group.
In 2015, Xilam launched the first of several waves of collectible Oggy and the Cockroaches figurines in a partnership with licensing agent Discovery initially and Gedis Newsstand in Italy, with more than 800,000 units sold as of 2016. The figures, produced by Grani Partners for Gedis, are so popular that a fourth collection was developed for April 2018.
In 2018, Xilam appointed Lansay as master toy partner for the series. Lansay produced and distributed an initial line of traditional plushes, electronic plushes, a full line of 3D plastic figures, and board and card games at retail in France in the first quarter of 2018, following the relaunch of the show on Gulli.


=== Apps ===
In 2017, Xilam released a new app in conjunction with the series. The game invites fans to enjoy a wild race between the titular character and his rival cockroaches Joey, Dee Dee and Marky, as they try to empty Oggy's fridge. The app was designed in-house by Xilam Animation and developed by mobile publishing company Playsoft. The free game features in-app purchases offering bonus levels, such as increases in speed and hover-boards, 3 different worlds to explore and super powers, series-accurate graphics, obstacles and projectiles to avoid, coins to collect and increase Oggy's skills, and the chance to challenge friends on Facebook. By 2017, the app had already racked up more than 1.5 million downloads, and 9,000 reviews with an average rating of 4.1 stars out of 5.
The brand's various apps boast over 20 million downloads as of 2019.


== Controversy ==
The series' run on the American Nickelodeon was short-lived; it entered a brief controversy in the United States during a broadcast on the network on 5 March 2015, when the network aired "(Un)Happy Camper!", an episode in which the appearance of a framed portrait of a topless woman was seen in the background of a brief shot in Oggy's trailer during the scene where he enters it after Joey switches oil and water signs. However, the series aired in a 3:30 P.M. ET/PT timeslot on the American Nickelodeon network, before most school-age children got home from school, so the incident did not gain mainstream media attention. Faced with the anger of parents and complaints from many viewers, Nickelodeon quickly intervened; the episode was quickly removed from its website and rotation on its television network. The series continued to air on Nickelodeon in that timeslot until the season's episodes were exhausted, and it aired on sister network Nicktoons until it was quietly removed from the schedule by May of the same year, likely solely for contractual purposes due to Nickelodeon's worldwide deal for the series, which requires an airing on its American networks. Both the network and Xilam declined to comment.
All later releases of the episode, from airings worldwide to the official Oggy channel on YouTube, replace the picture with a beach scene.


== Reception and legacy ==

The show holds a cult classic status in India as well as in many Southeast Asian countries. Emily Ashby of Common Sense Media gave the show 2/5 stars, saying that the show "lays up slapstick comedy and physical violence among its mutually contentious characters to get laughs".
According to a 2018 Kantar TNS study on cartoon popularity, Oggy and the Cockroaches is known by 69% of all French people and, with 30% of the global population, is the most popular children's program among French households with children, ahead of Totally Spies! (28%) and Rabbids Invasion (27%).
As of 2021, the series had generated €100 million in revenue since its inception.


== See also ==
Pakdam Pakdai, a 2013 Indian animated series based around a dog and three mice by Nikhil Vyas
List of French animated television series
List of French television series


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Oggy and the Cockroaches at Wikimedia Commons
Official website
Website of the producer Xilam (in English)
Oggy and the Cockroaches at IMDb
Oggy and the Cockroaches's channel on YouTube