Partiful is an event planning and management platform. The service allows users to create events, invite guests (often via text message), and perform various event hosting tasks, including managing RSVPs and sending updates to attendees. Currently, all services are offered free of charge to users.


== History ==
Partiful was founded in 2020 by Joy Tao and Shreya Murthy, who met while working at Palantir Technologies. Finding it hard to build community in her twenties as her friends migrated from Facebook to various social media platforms, Murthy envisioned a central online location for organizing events through texts instead of email. While Partiful launched as a website during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, by 2021 it started to gain followers.
The platform gained significant traction in 2022, also securing $20 million in Series A funding that year. The service has seen significant adoption among Gen Z, millennials and startup founders, with the majority of users under the age of 30.
The company has claimed "millions" of active users by the end of 2023. Partiful expanded into iOS and Android apps in 2024. 
In October 2024, the Partiful website was used to circulate invitations to a Timothée Chalamet look-alike contest in Washington Square Park which generated over 2,500 RSVPs.
As of 2025, Partiful was used in over 100 countries.


== Features ==
Partiful allows users to create event invitations using customized templates. Invitations are distributed via links that support RSVP responses and text blasts without requiring account registration or app installation. Hosts can poll guests to coordinate event dates, while guests can interact using emojis and GIFs. The platform supports payment collection through Venmo, Cash App, and PayPal, allows photo sharing, and includes a messaging feature for sending updates and reminders.


== Awards and recognition ==
Partiful was named a finalist for Apple's App Store Awards for Cultural Impact in 2024.
Partiful was named Google's Best App of the Year in 2024.
Partiful was named as one of Time's 100 Most Influential Companies of 2025.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website