PulsePoint is a 911-connected mobile app that allows users to view and receive live alerts of calls being responded to by fire departments and emergency medical services. The app aims to have bystanders trained in CPR help cardiac arrest victims before emergency crews arrive, which can increase their chance of survival. The app interfaces with the local government public safety answering point, and notifies nearby users of incidents in public spaces. In February 2017, PulsePoint introduced a professional version called Verified Responder that also alerts in residential settings. Based in the San Francisco Bay Area, PulsePoint is run by a public 501(c)(3) non-profit foundation of the same name. As of November 2024, the foundation reported that connected agencies had requested the assistance of 1,013,000 nearby responders for 294,000 cardiac arrest events.
In addition to Android and iOS, PulsePoint offers a web client at web.pulsepoint.org that allows users to view the same data that appears in PulsePoint Respond with a browser. PulsePoint uses a standardized set of incident types normalized across Public safety answering points (PSAP) and Computer-aided dispatch (CAD) system vendors. The foundation also underwrites an automated external defibrillator (AED) app and registry to provide location information to PulsePoint responders and dispatchers.
In September 2018, the PulsePoint Respond app was approved by the First Responder Network Authority (FirstNet) and added to the App Catalog. PulsePoint Respond is a FirstNet Certified app.


== History ==
Richard Price, president of the PulsePoint Foundation, said that the idea for the application came to him in 2010 while he was serving as the fire chief in the San Ramon Valley, and witnessed a firetruck responding to a cardiac arrest while he was off-duty. Price was certified to perform CPR and had a defibrillator, which could have been useful if he had heard about the incident.  The American Heart Association estimates that 383,000 out of hospital cardiac arrests occur each year in the United States.
In 2012 and 2013, PulsePoint was nominated for the Webby Award.Best Use of GPS or Location Technology.  In 2014, the application was once again nominated, this time in the category of City & Urban Innovation.


== AED Registry ==
Along with the intention of getting CPR started faster and more often, a key objective of the PulsePoint Respond app is to inform those near a cardiac arrest event of the location of Automated External Defibrillators (AED) in the immediate vicinity of the victim. To accomplish this, the PulsePoint Foundation maintains an on‑demand (cloud-based) registry of AED locations and encourages anyone to contribute device locations. This crowdsourced AED location information is subsequently reviewed by local public safety agencies with support from the foundation. Approved AEDs are then shown to responders and dispatchers during cardiac emergencies via the PulsePoint AED Registry API. All aspects of the registry are provided free of charge.
On April 12, 2017, the PulsePoint Foundation announced a partnership with Priority Dispatch Corporation to allow dispatchers to inform callers of the location of nearby AEDs when the Medical Priority Dispatch System deemed them necessary. The PulsePoint AED registry is FirstNet Certified for use in emergency communications centers in the United States.
In June 2019 PulsePoint extended the registry to include other collocated resources including naloxone (e.g., Narcan®) and epinephrine (e.g., EpiPen®), along with bleeding control kits.


== Concerns ==
Some privacy experts have expressed concern that the app may invade the medical privacy of victims. The Los Angeles County Fire Department, one of the many users of the app, has pointed out that The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) protects the privacy of identifiable health information. Notifications only display an address and, possibly, name of a business.
Additional concerns that have been raised are that the app can cause too many bystanders to congregate at the scene of an emergency and that those responding via the app may not be trained in CPR or AED.
On May 9, 2018, the International Association of Fire Chiefs (IAFC) issued a Position Statement on PulsePoint.


== Features ==
Along with being able to view a list of calls in real time, users also have the option to listen in to radio traffic. During a CPR-needed response, this functionality allows citizen and off-duty rescuers to hear the dispatcher update emergency responders regarding patient location, scene conditions, etc. To facilitate the live feed, PulsePoint uses Broadcastify.
On December 11, 2018, PulsePoint released v4.1 for iOS that included the ability to override a device's Do Not Disturb setting and play an alert sound even when the device is muted for “CPR Needed” alerts. This required a special entitlement from Apple.
The application has an interface with Flickr that allows agencies to share photos through the app.


== Users ==

As of January 2024, the dispatch centers in more than 4,950 communities were connected to PulsePoint with over 3,000,000 users. Some of the most well-known agencies include:

Akron Fire Department
Alameda County Fire Department
Albuquerque Fire Rescue
Anaheim Fire & Rescue
Anne Arundel County Fire Department
Atlanta Fire Rescue Department
Bloomington Fire Department
Brevard County Fire Rescue
British Columbia Ambulance Service
California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
Chesapeake Fire Department
Cincinnati Fire Department
City of Casa Grande Fire Department
Clark County Fire Department (Nevada)
Cleveland EMS
Columbus Division of Fire
Coral Springs Fire Department
District of Columbia Fire and Emergency Medical Services Department
El Paso Fire Department
Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Department
Fort Lauderdale Fire-Rescue Department
Frisco Fire Department
Hawaii Fire Department
Henderson Fire Department
Hilton Head Island Fire Rescue
Honolulu EMS
Howard County Department of Fire and Rescue Services
Kansas City Fire Department
Kansas City Kansas Fire Department
Kern County Fire Department
Las Vegas Fire & Rescue Department
Lincoln Fire & Rescue Department
Livermore-Pleasanton Fire Department
Long Beach Fire Department (California)
Los Angeles County Fire Department
Los Angeles Fire Department
Madison Fire Department
Marin County Fire Department
Mecklenburg County, North Carolina
Miami Beach Fire Department
Milwaukee Fire Department
Naperville Fire Department
Norfolk Fire Rescue
Orange City Fire Department
Orange County Fire Authority
Orange County Fire Rescue
Orlando Fire Department
Palm Beach County Fire Rescue
Pasco County Fire Rescue
Pittsburgh Dept. of Public Safety and Allegheny County Emergency Services
Plano Fire-Rescue
Portland Fire & Rescue
Prince George's County Fire/EMS Department
Prince William County Department of Fire and Rescue
Rapid City Fire Department
Reno Fire Department
Richmond Fire Department (Virginia)
Riverside Fire Department
Sacramento Fire Department
Sacramento Metropolitan Fire District
Salem Fire Department
San Bernardino County Fire Department
San Diego Fire-Rescue Department
San Francisco Fire Department
San Jose Fire Department
San Luis Obispo Fire Department
San Ramon Valley Fire Protection District
Santa Barbara County Fire Department
Santa Clara County Fire Department
Seattle Fire Department
Seminole County Fire Department
Sioux Falls Fire Rescue
Sonoma County Fire District
South Bend Fire Department
South Metro Fire Rescue
Spokane Fire Department
Suffolk County Department of Fire, Rescue and Emergency Services
Tualatin Valley Fire and Rescue
Tucson Fire Department
Ventura County Fire Department
Virginia Beach Department of Emergency Medical Services
Wake County EMS


== Incident Responder Unit Codes ==
Orange=Dispatched (?=Awaiting Acknowledge) Green=Enroute Red=On Scene (^=Available on Scene) Yellow=Transport Blue=Transport Arrived Gray=Cleared from Incident
The codes themselves are defined by each agency, and are typically followed by a number to identify a particular instance of each asset type. A legend is sometimes provided on the agency information page, and following are some common examples:
B=Battalion
BC=Battalion Chief
E=Engine
CMD=Command
CPT=Helicopter
C=Crew
DZR=Dozer
HM=Hazmat
ME=Medic Engine
MRE=Medic Rescue Engine
P=Patrol
R=Rescue
RE=Rescue Engine
SQ=Squad
T=Truck
U=Utility
WT=Water Tender


== References ==


== External links ==
PulsePoint Website
@PulsePoint (Twitter)
PulsePoint Web Client
PulsePoint AED Registry
PulsePoint Respond on App Store
PulsePoint Respond on Google Play
PulsePoint AED on App Store
PulsePoint AED on Google Play