Sex and the City is an American romantic comedy-drama television series created by Darren Star for HBO, based on the newspaper column and 1996 book by Candace Bushnell. It premiered in the United States on June 6, 1998, and concluded on February 22, 2004, with 94 episodes broadcast over six seasons.
The series follows the lives of four female friends living in New York City: the streetwise newspaper columnist Carrie Bradshaw (played by Sarah Jessica Parker), the sexually liberal PR professional Samantha Jones (Kim Cattrall), the more conservative art dealer Charlotte York (Kristin Davis) and the cynical lawyer Miranda Hobbes (Cynthia Nixon).
Sex and the City received both acclaim and criticism for its characters and themes, and is credited with helping to increase HBO's popularity. It won numerous accolades including seven Primetime Emmy Awards, eight Golden Globe Awards and three Screen Actors Guild Awards. The series was ranked fifth on Entertainment Weekly's "New TV Classics" list, and has been cited as one of the best television series of all time. It airs in syndication worldwide. 
Sex and the City was followed by the feature films Sex and the City (2008) and Sex and the City 2 (2010), and a prequel television series commissioned by the CW, The Carrie Diaries (2013–14). A sequel series, And Just Like That..., premiered on HBO Max on December 9, 2021, without Cattrall.


== Development ==
The show is based on writer Candace Bushnell's column "Sex and the City", published in The New York Observer, which was later compiled into a book of the same name. Bushnell has mentioned in several interviews that the character of Carrie Bradshaw in her columns is her alter ego. Initially, she wrote the column from her first-person perspective but later invented Carrie, introduced as Bushnell's friend, so her parents would not realize they were reading about her own sex life. Both Bushnell and the television version of Carrie (who had no last name in the column) share the same initials, further emphasizing their connection. Like Bushnell, Carrie writes columns for the fictional New York Star, which are eventually compiled into a book within the series, and later becomes a writer for Vogue.
Bushnell collaborated with television producer Darren Star, whom she had met while profiling him for Vogue, to adapt the columns for television. Both HBO and ABC expressed interest in the series, but Star ultimately chose HBO for the creative freedom it offered. Star wrote the pilot with Sarah Jessica Parker in mind for the role of Carrie. According to Parker, "I was flattered but didn't want to do it. He convinced me, begged me to do it, and I signed a contract." The pilot episode was shot in June 1997, a year before the series premiered. However, Parker initially disliked the pilot, stating, "I hated the look, the clothes ... I didn't think it worked" and feared it might end her career. She even offered to work on three HBO movies unpaid to be released from her contract. Though Star refused to release her, he listened to her concerns and made significant changes before shooting the first season. Reflecting on the experience, Parker said, "The funny thing, after the first episode of season one, I never looked back, and the rest is history. I never thought, though, that the show would become what it has become."
HBO scheduled the buzzy show on Sunday nights, a night that broadcast networks typically neglected, and used Sex and the City and The Sopranos to create the network's popular Sunday night lineup, which has consistently aired prestige dramas and comedies year-round 


== Cast and characters ==


=== Carrie Bradshaw ===

Carrie Bradshaw (Sarah Jessica Parker) is the narrator and central character of the television series Sex and the City. Each episode is framed through her inner monologue while writing her weekly column, Sex and the City, for the fictional newspaper The New York Star. Initially conceptualized as a lawyer, the character was reimagined as a columnist to allow for greater narrative flexibility and engagement with New York City’s nightlife. Bradshaw is depicted as a prominent figure in New York’s social scene, recognized for her distinctive fashion sense. She resides in a studio apartment in an Upper East Side brownstone and maintains a close friendship with Stanford Blatch (Willie Garson), a gay talent agent.
Carrie’s most significant romantic relationship throughout the series is with Mr. Big (Chris Noth), a wealthy and enigmatic businessman. Their relationship is characterized by recurring breakups and reconciliations, primarily due to Big’s reluctance to fully commit. A recurring motif involves Carrie being interrupted whenever she attempts to state Big’s real name; his first name, John, is only disclosed in the final episode of the series.
Their second breakup occurs in Season 2 when Big moves to Paris for business and expresses little interest in a long-distance relationship. Carrie later encounters him with his new, significantly younger girlfriend, Natasha. Attempts at maintaining a friendship are strained, particularly after Big becomes engaged to Natasha Naginsky (Bridget Moynahan)—a level of commitment he previously denied Carrie.
In Season 3, Carrie enters a relationship with Aidan Shaw (John Corbett), a furniture designer with a more conventional and patient demeanor. Despite initial compatibility, Carrie engages in an affair with Big, which ends after Natasha discovers Carrie at Big’s apartment. After confessing the infidelity, Carrie and Aidan separate but reconcile in Season 4. Aidan proposes, but the engagement dissolves due to Carrie’s unresolved connection with Big.
As the series progresses, Carrie and Big attempt to redefine their relationship, eventually settling into a form of friendship. During the final season, Big experiences a health scare, prompting Carrie to reassess her feelings. However, his continued emotional unavailability leads her to pursue a new relationship.
Carrie later begins a relationship with Aleksandr Petrovsky (Mikhail Baryshnikov), a renowned Russian artist. He introduces her to an international lifestyle and demonstrates a greater degree of romantic attentiveness. Petrovsky eventually asks Carrie to relocate to Paris, which she agrees to, despite concerns from her friends—particularly Miranda—about the relationship’s imbalance.
In Paris, Carrie becomes increasingly disillusioned due to Petrovsky’s preoccupation with his work and her sense of isolation. After an argument in which he accidentally strikes her, Carrie decides to leave. Mr. Big travels to Paris to reconcile with her. Following a confrontation with Petrovsky, Big finds Carrie in the hotel lobby and tells her she is "the one." The series concludes with Carrie and Big returning to New York City together.


=== Charlotte York ===

Charlotte York (Kristin Davis) is one of the four central characters in Sex and the City. She is depicted as having a conventional and privileged upbringing in Connecticut and works at an art gallery in New York City. Raised in an Episcopalian household, Charlotte is characterized by her idealism, traditional values, and perfectionist nature. She is an alumna of Smith College, where she majored in art history and minored in finance. Although the show states she was a member of the Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority, no such organizations exist at the real Smith College. During the series, it is revealed that Charlotte was voted prom queen, homecoming queen, and student body president, in addition to being a cheerleader and track team captain.
Charlotte's relationships often reflect her desire to find a suitable partner for marriage, typically dating men with professional or social prestige.
Despite her traditional values, Charlotte occasionally subverts expectations. She briefly has a relationship with an Orthodox Jewish artist, dresses in drag for a portrait, and agrees to pose for an artist's rendering of her vulva. She and Samantha often clash over their differing perspectives on sex and relationships.
In Season 3, Charlotte meets Trey MacDougal (Kyle MacLachlan), a cardiologist from a wealthy, old-money family. After a brief courtship, Charlotte proposes marriage, which Trey accepts. Their engagement and wedding proceed quickly, but they encounter problems immediately. Charlotte discovers that Trey suffers from impotence, and his refusal to address the issue, coupled with the interference of his domineering mother Bunny (Frances Sternhagen), strains the marriage. Despite attempts to reconcile, including pursuing fertility treatments and considering adoption, the couple ultimately separates and divorces.
Charlotte later begins a relationship with Harry Goldenblatt (Evan Handler), her divorce attorney. Initially reluctant due to Harry’s physical appearance and mannerisms, Charlotte is encouraged by friends to pursue the relationship. Their bond deepens, but Harry informs Charlotte he cannot marry someone who is not Jewish. Motivated by her commitment to him, Charlotte converts to Judaism. Although they briefly separate due to miscommunication and expectations, they reconcile, and Harry proposes. The couple marries in a traditional Jewish ceremony.
Charlotte later becomes pregnant through acupuncture therapy but suffers a miscarriage. The couple adopts a daughter, Lily, from China. In Sex and the City: The Movie, it is revealed that Charlotte later becomes pregnant and gives birth to their second child, Rose.


=== Miranda Hobbes ===

Miranda Hobbes (Cynthia Nixon) is one of the four main characters in Sex and the City. A Harvard Law School graduate (Class of 1990), Miranda is a career-driven attorney from the Philadelphia area. She is characterized by her pragmatic worldview, sharp wit, and skepticism toward romantic relationships. Often acting as a voice of reason within the group, she is also one of Carrie's closest confidantes.
Miranda is initially introduced as highly independent and guarded, particularly in matters of love. Early in the series, she is set up on a blind date with Skipper, a friend of Carrie’s, but dismisses him for being too passive.
Her most significant and long-term relationship in the series is with Steve Brady (David Eigenberg), a bartender she meets during a chance encounter. What begins as a casual relationship gradually develops into a deeper connection. However, financial and lifestyle disparities between the two create tension. Steve struggles with Miranda’s success and independence, while Miranda grapples with vulnerability. Their relationship ends when Steve, feeling inadequate, breaks up with her after returning a suit she had offered to buy him for a work function.
The two later reconcile after a candid encounter, and Steve moves into Miranda’s apartment. Disagreements about having children lead to another breakup, which is further underscored by their failed attempt to co-parent a dog. Despite separating, Miranda continues to support Steve when he is diagnosed with testicular cancer, helping him through his treatment.
Following a brief period of renewed intimacy, Miranda discovers she is pregnant. Although she initially considers terminating the pregnancy, she ultimately decides to keep the baby. She later gives birth to a son, Brady Hobbes (named using Steve’s surname). As a single working mother, Miranda navigates the challenges of balancing her legal career and parenting, often with the assistance of her housekeeper, Magda, who becomes a maternal figure and caregiver.
Miranda eventually acknowledges she still has feelings for Steve but chooses not to interfere when she learns he is dating another woman. She subsequently begins a relationship with Dr. Robert Leeds (Blair Underwood), a sports physician for the New York Knicks. Although Robert expresses his love for Miranda, she is unable to reciprocate. At Brady’s first birthday party, Miranda realizes she is still in love with Steve and confesses her feelings. Steve reciprocates, and the two reconcile, ending their respective relationships.
They marry in a simple ceremony held in a community garden. The couple relocates from Manhattan to a house in Brooklyn, a move Miranda initially resists but eventually embraces for the sake of their family.
In the final episodes of the series, Miranda and Steve care for Steve’s mother, Mary, who is suffering from dementia/Alzheimer's. Miranda allows Mary to live with them and assumes caregiving responsibilities, including bathing her during a particularly difficult episode. Her housekeeper Magda remarks that Miranda’s actions reflect the nature of genuine love, highlighting Miranda’s emotional growth over the course of the series.


=== Samantha Jones ===

Samantha Jones (Kim Cattrall) is the oldest and most sexually confident of the four central characters in Sex and the City. A successful public relations executive, Samantha is portrayed as assertive, independent, and unapologetically open about her sexuality. She often describes herself as a "try-sexual," expressing a willingness to explore various sexual experiences. Rejecting conventional notions of romance, Samantha declares early in the series that she prefers sex without emotional involvement, likening her approach to that traditionally attributed to men.
Throughout the series, Samantha engages in numerous short-term sexual relationships. One of her more serious involvements occurs when she enters a lesbian relationship with Maria (Sônia Braga), an artist. The relationship marks her first attempt at monogamy but ends when Samantha realizes that her sexual preferences are incompatible with long-term emotional exclusivity.
Samantha later develops a professional and personal relationship with hotel magnate Richard Wright (James Remar), whom she initially views as a male counterpart due to his similarly non-committal attitude toward relationships. Their relationship evolves into a monogamous one, and Samantha finds herself unexpectedly developing feelings for him. However, after discovering Richard’s infidelity, she ends the relationship despite a brief reconciliation. Her lingering mistrust ultimately prevents the relationship from continuing.
In the final season, Samantha begins a relationship with Jerry "Smith" Jerrod (Jason Lewis), a younger aspiring actor. What begins as a casual affair becomes more serious over time. Samantha plays a significant role in advancing Smith's career and gradually allows herself to be emotionally vulnerable with him. During her battle with breast cancer, Smith provides unwavering support, including shaving his head in solidarity during her chemotherapy treatment. Despite her initial resistance, Samantha eventually embraces the emotional depth of their relationship.
In Sex and the City: The Movie, Samantha is living in Los Angeles with Smith and managing his acting career. Although they remain together for several years, Samantha ultimately decides to end the relationship, recognizing that she has lost sight of her personal desires and independence. She returns to New York City, choosing to prioritize her own well-being. The breakup is portrayed as amicable, and they remain friends.


=== Recurring roles ===
List of notables recurring roles during series


== Episodes ==


== Premise ==


=== Season 1 (1998) ===

Carrie Bradshaw lives in Manhattan and writes a column titled "Sex and the City." At a birthday party for Miranda, Carrie and her friends discuss the idea of having sex "like men", meaning without emotional attachment. She decides to test this theory by sleeping with a man who had previously broken her heart. This time, however, she treats him with the same detachment he once showed her, and she discovers that he seems eager to see her again when they next meet. Carrie openly discusses her relationships with her best friend Stanford Blatch, who is gay and perpetually searching for love.
Carrie has several chance encounters with a handsome businessman whom Samantha dubs "Mr. Big." They begin dating, but Carrie is dismayed to learn that he is still seeing other people. Although he eventually agrees to exclusivity, he does not introduce Carrie to his mother and avoids referring to her as "the one." Frustrated by his lack of commitment, Carrie decides to break off their relationship rather than go on a planned vacation with him.
Carrie sets up Miranda with her friend Skipper. Miranda and Skipper date intermittently, with their contrasting personalities—Miranda being more assertive and Skipper more laid back—causing tension. After they break up, Miranda sees him with another woman and feels compelled to resume their relationship, but they break up again when he seeks exclusivity, and she does not.
Charlotte dates a marriage-minded man, but they clash over china patterns. She also declines to have anal sex with another boyfriend and consents to pose nude for a famous painter.
Samantha has a series of brief sexual encounters, including one with an artist who videotapes his partners, with Charlotte's doorman, with a married couple, and others. When she meets James, who initially seems perfect for her, Samantha is heartbroken to discover that he has an extremely small penis.


=== Season 2 (1999) ===

Carrie dates a baseball player on the rebound but ends the relationship when she realizes she's not over Big. She then dates a filmmaker who has compromised his artistic integrity, a shoplifter, and a nice guy whom she inadvertently scares away by snooping. Eventually, she rekindles her relationship with Big, initially keeping it a secret from her friends. Their relationship remains tumultuous, and when Big reveals that he may have to move to Paris for a year but does not explicitly invite Carrie to join him, they break up for a second time. Carrie then unsuccessfully tries to turn a friend-with-benefits into something more, dates a writer with a great family but who is consistently "early" in bed, and then a recovering alcoholic who uses Carrie as a replacement for his previous addiction. She later encounters Big again, who has returned from Paris with his new 20-something fiancée, Natasha (played by Bridget Moynahan).
Charlotte encounters a range of suitors, including a legendary expert in cunnilingus, a handy actor who lives next door, a widower looking for a relationship, a man who undergoes adult circumcision, a famous actor, a pastry chef with effeminate tendencies, a shoe salesman with a foot fetish, and a 20-something who gives her crabs.
Miranda dates a man who enjoys dirty talk, fakes it with an ophthalmologist, and tries to adapt to a guy who likes to watch porn during sex. By the time she meets Steve, a bartender, she is skeptical of his niceness. Although they begin dating, differences in their schedules and finances eventually lead to a breakup. They reconnect and end up in bed together again, but not before Miranda dates a man who wants to get caught cheating, a Peeping Tom in the next building, and a divorced father.
After a brief attempt at couples therapy, Samantha ends her relationship with James. She then has encounters with a litigator, a salsa dancer, her personal trainer, a sports fan whose sexual performance depends on his team's success, and Charlotte's brother. She also meets a man whose anatomy is too large even for her.
The end of season two also marks the end of characters' talking directly to the camera.


=== Season 3 (2000) ===

Carrie starts off dating a politician, followed by a bisexual man. Meanwhile, Big marries Natasha, and Carrie meets Aidan, a furniture maker. Carrie and Aidan have a seemingly flawless relationship until Carrie and Big begin an affair. When Natasha catches Carrie in her and Big's apartment, both the affair and Carrie's relationship with Aidan come to an end, as does Big's marriage to Natasha.
Charlotte, in her quest for a husband, dates an investment banker with anger management issues, a photographer who encourages her to wear menswear, a bad kisser, and a man who calls out names during climax. She eventually meets Trey MacDougal; despite an awkward proposal, Trey's low libido, and conflicts with his domineering mother, the two marry. Their marriage begins with a sexless honeymoon, and as sexual issues persist, they ultimately decide to separate.
Miranda and Steve move in together. Steve expresses a desire to have a baby, but a decision to get a puppy instead highlights the maturity differences between them. Steve moves out, and Miranda makes partner at her law firm. She also dates a series of men, including a phone sex enthusiast, a fake ER doctor, a man who doesn't swallow his food, and a police detective.
Samantha engages in a series of relationships, including with a firefighter, a short man, her assistant, a black man whose sister disapproves, a recreational Viagra user, a man who tastes bad, Trey's Scottish cousin, a dildo model, and a college-aged virgin. She also faces a menopause scare, gets tested for HIV, and buys a new apartment in the Meatpacking District, where she eventually makes peace with the transgender women on her street.
After her breakups with Big and Aidan, Carrie dates a man who still lives at home, teaches a class at the Learning Annex on how to meet men, gets mugged, and tries to apologize to Natasha. She and Big also attempt to establish a friendship.


=== Season 4 (2001–02) ===

After a chance meeting with Aidan at the opening of a bar he co-owns, Carrie convinces him to restart their relationship. Aidan eventually moves into her apartment after purchasing it when her building goes co-op and later proposes. Despite her initial misgivings, Carrie accepts the proposal but soon realizes she is not ready for marriage. Although Aidan initially agrees to give her more time, he soon begins to pressure her into marriage, revealing his lingering mistrust due to her past affair with Big. They ultimately break up, and Aidan moves out. Carrie buys her apartment with the down payment lent to her by Charlotte, who gives Carrie her engagement ring from Trey. At the end of season 4, Carrie discovers that Big has sold his apartment and is moving to Napa, California.
Charlotte and Trey, though living apart, continue to have marital relations. They eventually reconcile, and Charlotte moves back into their shared apartment. They decide to try for a baby but discover that Charlotte is reproductively challenged. After fertility treatments and considering adoption, their marriage falls apart under the strain, and they decide to divorce.
Miranda supports Steve through his battle with testicular cancer and surgery. Later, when Steve feels emasculated by the surgery, they have sex, and Miranda becomes pregnant. She initially considers an abortion, a decision that is particularly distressing to Charlotte, who is struggling with her own fertility issues. However, Miranda ultimately decides to keep the baby.
Samantha flirts with a priest, has nude photos taken, attempts a relationship with a lesbian, and sleeps with various partners, including a man who engages in baby talk, a wrestling coach, and a farmer. She then lands a major PR account with hotel magnate Richard Wright, who is resolutely single. Their relationship begins as purely sexual but gradually deepens into something more, leading them to attempt monogamy. However, Samantha eventually catches Richard cheating, leading to their breakup.


=== Season 5 (2002) ===

Carrie spends time focusing on herself, initially fearing that this might lead to her being fired from writing her sex column. Instead, a publisher expresses interest in turning her columns into a book. A book tour takes her to San Francisco, where she briefly reunites with Big. Back in New York, she meets Jack Berger, a fellow author with whom she feels an immediate connection, but he is already in a relationship.
Charlotte has a confrontation with her former mother-in-law over the legalities of the apartment she shared with Trey and hires Harry Goldenblatt as her divorce attorney. Despite his physical shortcomings, she finds herself attracted to him, and they begin a sexual relationship. As she develops real feelings for Harry, he reveals that he must marry within his Jewish faith, prompting Charlotte to seriously consider conversion.
Miranda, now a mother to her son Brady, struggles to balance work, dating, and her previous lifestyle. Steve remains supportive, and one afternoon they end up in bed together, leading Miranda to question her feelings for him.
Samantha attempts to rekindle her relationship with Richard but finds herself constantly paranoid and unable to trust him. During a trip to Atlantic City with Richard and the girls, she realizes she cannot overcome her lack of trust and decides to end the relationship for good.


=== Season 6 (2003–04) ===

Carrie begins dating Jack Berger, who is considered her best "mental match" among all her relationships. However, Berger's struggles as an author, combined with Carrie's success with her upcoming book, create tension between them, leading to their breakup. Big returns to New York for an angioplasty, and Carrie realizes she still has feelings for him; however, she also recognizes that he still cannot fully commit. After Big returns to Napa, Carrie meets Aleksandr Petrovsky, a famous Russian artist. Aleksandr appears to be attentive to Carrie in ways that Big never was, and he invites her to accompany him to Paris. She agrees but quickly realizes how inattentive he becomes when focused on his work. Carrie ends the relationship just as Big arrives in Paris, ready to finally commit to her as "the one."
Charlotte decides that life with Harry, who accepts her fertility challenges, is worth converting to Judaism. After completing the conversion process, she pressures Harry to "set the date" in a way that he finds insulting, leading him to break up with her. However, they encounter each other at a mixer, and after Charlotte offers a tearful apology, they rekindle their relationship and eventually marry. When fertility treatments fail, they decide to adopt and later receive approval to adopt a child from China.
After realizing she is still in love with Steve, Miranda discovers that he has begun a serious relationship with another woman, Debbie, prompting her to start a relationship with Robert (played by Blair Underwood). However, at their son Brady's first birthday party, Miranda and Steve confess their feelings for each other and renew their relationship. Miranda proposes to Steve, and they marry in a community park. With their growing family, Miranda agrees to move to Brooklyn, where they purchase a brownstone. After Steve's mother, Mary (played by Anne Meara), suffers a stroke and subsequent memory loss, she moves in with the couple.
Samantha begins a relationship with Jerry Jerrod, a much younger waiter who is also a struggling actor. Using her PR expertise, she helps boost his career, even rebranding him as Smith Jerrod. Although Samantha initially tries to keep their relationship casual, she develops genuine feelings for him. Smith stands by Samantha after she is diagnosed with breast cancer, shaving his head in solidarity when she loses her hair due to chemotherapy. He also remains patient and supportive when her treatment affects her sex drive. When Smith flies back from a movie shoot just to tell her that he loves her, Samantha replies, "You have meant more to me than any man I've ever known."
The season and the series concludes with the four women reunited in New York City, and with Carrie receiving a phone call from Big (finally revealing his first name, John), telling her that his Napa house is up for sale, and he is headed back to New York. Carrie's final voiceover states: "The most exciting, challenging and significant relationship of all is the one you have with yourself. And if you find someone to love the you you love, well, that's just fabulous."


== Reception ==
Sex and the City premiered on HBO on June 6, 1998, and was one of the highest-rated comedies of the season.


=== Awards and recognition ===

Over the course of its six seasons, Sex and the City was nominated for over 50 Primetime Emmy Awards and won seven: two for Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series (Jennifer McNamara), one for Outstanding Costumes, one for Outstanding Comedy Series, one for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series, one for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series (Sarah Jessica Parker), and one for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series (Cynthia Nixon).
The show was also nominated for 24 Golden Globe Awards and won eight: three for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy, four for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy (Sarah Jessica Parker), and one for Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries, or Television Film (Kim Cattrall).
In 2007, Sex and the City was listed as one of TIME magazine's "100 Best TV Shows of All-TIME." Entertainment Weekly included it in its end-of-the-decade "best-of" list, stating, "The clothes from SATC raise your cosmos! A toast to the wonderful wardrobe from Sex and the City, which taught us that no flower is too big, no skirt too short, and no shoe too expensive."
For its 65th anniversary, TV Guide ranked the episode "My Motherboard, My Self" as the eighth-best episode of the 21st century.
In 2023, Variety ranked Sex and the City as the sixth-greatest TV show of all time.


=== Fashion ===
In 2013, The New York Times credited Sex and the City and its costume designer Patricia Field with "starting crazes for nameplate necklaces, Manolo Blahnik shoes, flower corsages, and visible bra straps." Field described the show's influence as "like sitting at the bottom of an atom bomb." A 2018 feature in The Guardian highlighted the show's enduring impact, quoting fashion editor Chelsea Fairless: "I would venture to say that the mix of high fashion and fast fashion that Patricia Field brought to the show influenced most people who work in fashion in one way or another." The article also noted fan accounts on Instagram, such as "Every Outfit on Sex and the City" and "Carrie Dragshaw," as evidence of the show's continued popular appeal and influence on fashion.


=== Criticism ===
Criticism has been expressed regarding the influence Sex and the City has on adolescents and how the images portrayed on the show affect the way women and young girls view themselves.
Tanya Gold of The Daily Telegraph stated, "Sex and the City is to feminism what sugar is to dental care" and argued that the show was dominated by images of women as either childlike or as sex objects. She pointed to the opening credits, where the protagonist wears a ballet skirt—"the sort that toddlers wear"—and is then passed by a bus ad featuring a scantily clad photo of herself. "In another [episode], Carrie realizes she is homeless because she has spent $40,000 on shoes and does not have a deposit for an apartment. (In this crisis, she cries and borrows the money for the deposit—what child would do anything else?)."
In addition to focusing on finding and keeping a man, the lead character also routinely hides her true thoughts and feelings from the men she dates. The show uses voiceovers to reveal Carrie's inner thoughts, which often conflict with how she expresses herself externally. Pop culture expert Ashli L. Dykes notes that "... [the] fear that men will no longer find a woman attractive if she reveals her true self is in contrast to the relationships among the four main female characters..."
Academic critics, however, are divided on whether Sex and the City is anti-feminist, feminist, or post-feminist. Some argue that regardless of the label applied, the show contributed significantly "to ongoing dialogue" and that it "shows women in a world where they can be feminine, attractive, and feminist at the same time ... the series gives a forum to a renewed postfeminist debate."
Andrea Press criticized the show for its handling of topics such as unexpected pregnancy, arguing that it contrasts with progressive feminist thought. In one episode, Miranda faces an unexpected pregnancy, prompting Carrie to reflect on her own experience with pregnancy and abortion. Press contends that Carrie's shame when sharing this story with her boyfriend serves to "undermine" the hard-won freedoms that allowed her choice, presenting "multiple critical perspectives toward the act." Press also argued that while the show is often lauded as a champion of progressive feminism, its characters adhere to traditional views of female gender roles, focusing heavily on appearance, glamour, and consumerism. She pointed out that the outfits worn by the characters are as central to the show as the storyline itself, with a significant emphasis on consumption and constant marketing messages throughout the series.
In retrospective analyses of the show, critics have reassessed Carrie Bradshaw as an unsympathetic protagonist, despite her portrayal as a positive figure. In 2013, Glamour called Carrie "the worst" character on the show, stating that "her brattiness and self-absorption eclipsed her redeeming qualities and even her awesome shoes." In a 2010 retrospective on the previous two decades of pop culture, ABC News named Carrie one of the ten worst characters of the past twenty years, describing her as a "snippy, self-righteous Manhattan snob" and citing her actions in Sex and the City 2 as evidence that she was beyond personal growth or redemption. Emily Nussbaum of The New Yorker, reflecting on the show a decade after it ended, argued that Bradshaw was "the unacknowledged first female anti-hero on television," who began as a "happy, curious explorer, out companionably smoking with modellizers," but from the second season on, she "spun out, becoming anxious, obsessive, and, despite her charm, wildly self-centered." Nussbaum also asserted that the show's reputation has "shrunk and faded" over time, largely due to disappointment that the series "gave in" to the limits of romantic comedy in its later seasons. She contended that until then, Sex and the City "was sharp, iconoclastic television." In addressing why the show is now "so often portrayed as a set of empty, static cartoons, an embarrassment to womankind," Nussbaum suggested: "It's a classic misunderstanding, I think, stemming from an unexamined hierarchy: the assumption that anything stylized (or formulaic, or pleasurable, or funny, or feminine, or explicit about sex rather than about violence, or made collaboratively) must be inferior." Nussbaum also challenged criticism of Sex and the City as anti-feminist, advocating for a more nuanced view of the characters as situated within different waves of feminism: "Miranda and Carrie were second-wave feminists, who believed in egalitarianism; Charlotte and Samantha were third-wave feminists, focused on exploiting the power of femininity, from opposing angles."
A 2018 article in The Guardian titled "'That show was as white as it gets!': Sex and the City's problematic legacy," highlighted the lack of non-white series regulars and "racial insensitivities" in the show, such as Carrie's reference to "ghetto gold" and Samantha's wearing of an afro wig to cover her baldness from chemotherapy. The article also referenced the #wokecharlotte memes that gained popularity on social media in 2017, in which Charlotte chastises Carrie for comments that retrospectively appear insensitive and ignorant (e.g., Carrie's labeling of bisexuality as a "layover on the way to Gay Town" and Samantha's use of transphobic language to refer to the sex workers outside her apartment). The creator of the memes stated that "it is satisfying to see the show get called out for the stuff that wouldn't hold up in 2017. It's true that it was progressive for its time, but that doesn't mean contemporary viewers should be dismissive of some of its more problematic content." On the 20th anniversary of the show's premiere, The Guardian published an opinion piece by Rebecca Nicholson, arguing that the show should not be discounted because of its retrospective flaws but should still be appreciated for being "a brilliant, daring, pioneering show."


== Broadcast and distribution ==
Season one of Sex and the City aired on HBO from June to August 1998. Season two followed, broadcasting from June to October 1999. Season three aired from June to October 2000. Season four was split into two parts: the first aired from June to August 2001, and the second in January and February 2002. Season five, which was shortened due to Sarah Jessica Parker's pregnancy, aired during the summer of 2002. The final season, season six, consisted of twenty episodes that were also split into two parts: the first aired from June to September 2003, and the second from January to February 2004.


=== Syndication ===
Sex and the City is currently syndicated in the United States by HBO corporate sibling (under Warner Bros. Discovery) Warner Bros. Television Distribution. CBS Studios (successors to Rysher Entertainment and Paramount Domestic Television) and their distribution arm own international rights. The series was filmed with traditional broadcast syndication in mind during its run, and pre-planned scenes with different dialogue and content were created specifically for syndication, along with appropriate cuts of each episode to fit a 22-minute timeslot which includes advertising.


==== United States ====
The American cable channel HBO was the original broadcaster of Sex and the City; HBO Max now carries the entire series as it was originally aired. TBS and WGN America were the first American channels to syndicate the show, utilizing the secondary syndicated cut; it also aired on various broadcast stations for several seasons. As of 2021, E! occasionally broadcasts the syndicated version of the series.
In February 2021, a remastered high-definition version of the series was released on HBO Max. The original film negatives were rescanned at 4K resolution and reformatted to a 16:9 aspect ratio by extending the sides of the frame. In May 2023, following the rebranding of HBO Max to Max, the series became available in 4K HDR and Dolby Atmos. It was released on Netflix on April 1, 2024.


==== Canada ====
In Canada, the cable channel Bravo aired the first run of Sex and the City every Saturday at 11:00 PM, a few weeks behind the U.S. HBO broadcast (the series predated the 2008 establishment of HBO Canada).


==== Australia ====
In Australia, the Nine Network aired the series every Monday between 9:30 PM and 11:00 PM. After 2004, the cable channel W aired it until the summer of 2008, when Arena began airing it alongside Will & Grace, with promos stating, "all the good guys are gay." The series was also repeated on Network Ten from 2005 to 2010 and on Eleven (later rebranded as 10 Peach) from February 2011. It is currently syndicated on the cable channel Fox Showcase and occasionally features in marathons on the cable channel Binge, where back-to-back episodes of various TV shows are aired.


==== Ireland ====
In Ireland, TV3 premiered Sex and the City in February 1999. Since 2006, repeats of the series have aired on 3e.


==== United Kingdom ====
In the United Kingdom, Channel 4 originally aired the series, with the first episode broadcast on 3 February 1999. As of August 2009, a double bill of the show aired each weeknight at 10:30 PM on Comedy Central, and another double bill aired on Wednesdays at 9 PM on 5*. From 2015, the series was repeated on CBS Drama. Starting on 26 February 2018, the series returned to Channel 4 on its music-oriented channel, 4Music. Since 2020, the series has been aired on Sky Comedy.


== Home media ==
The first five seasons of Sex and the City were released on VHS in box sets.
All six seasons have since been released commercially on DVD, with the sixth season split into two parts. These DVDs have been released in region 1 (Americas), region 2 (Europe & Middle East), region 3 (Korea), and region 4 (Oceania & South Pacific) formats. In addition to region encoding, the releases vary depending on the region in which they were distributed.
Beyond the standard single-season DVD box sets, limited edition collector's editions have been released, featuring all six seasons in one complete set. These editions differ by region. In Europe, a special "shoebox" packaging was created as a nod to Carrie Bradshaw's love for shoes, while the U.S. and Canada versions were packaged in a more traditional fold-out suede case and included an additional bonus DVD with special features. In Mexico and Oceania, the set was packaged in a beauty case.
Some European viewers encountered issues with the Region 2 edition of the season 1 DVD, as it was not converted to the PAL video format and remained in its original American NTSC format. This caused compatibility problems with certain European television sets and DVD players. However, all subsequent Region 2 DVD releases were properly transferred to PAL format using the original film prints, and season 1 has since been re-released in PAL.
Outside the U.S., Sex and the City boxed sets were released through Paramount Pictures, while in the U.S. and Canada, they were released by the program's original broadcaster, HBO. In Australia, single editions were made available, with each disc sold separately. In South Korea, complete six-season special DVD shoebox sets were released. In Brazil, the first and fifth seasons were released on DVD Dual, while the remaining seasons were released in DVD box sets.
Selected episodes are also available as part of the Sex and the City Essentials DVD collection. This collection includes four separately packaged discs, each containing three selected episodes centered around a common theme:

The Best of Lust: Features the episodes "The Fuck Buddy," "Running with Scissors," and "The Turtle and the Hare".
The Best of Mr. Big: Features the episodes "Sex and the City," "Ex and the City," and "I Heart NY".
The Best of Romance: Features the episodes "Baby, Talk is Cheap," "Hop, Skip and a Week," and "An American Girl in Paris (Part Deux)".
The Best of Breakups: Features the episodes "Don't Ask, Don't Tell," "I Love a Charade," and "The Post-it Always Sticks Twice".
The Best of Fashion: Features the episodes "Secret Sex," "The Real Me," and "Luck Be an Old Lady". This DVD was exclusively released at Target stores in the U.S. and was the only DVD in the "Essentials" collection to have a colored cover instead of the standard black-and-white design.
The high-definition remastered series, including the two films, was released on Blu-ray on November 2, 2021.


== Soundtrack releases ==
Two digital CDs (the albums from Irma Records) contain tracks used in the show's actual soundtrack:

Sex and the City – Soundtrack [Import]
2000/2001/2002
Sire Records
Includes the main theme from the show, written by Douglas J. Cuomo.
Sex and the City – Official Soundtrack (Two-disc set)
March 1, 2004
Sony TV
36 hits, including the songs of Beyoncé, Kylie Minogue, Justin Timberlake, Aretha Franklin, Nina Simone, Daniel Bedingfield, Anastacia, Kelly Rowland, Sugababes, Cyndi Lauper, Jamiroquai and Britney Spears among many others.


== Franchise ==


=== Films ===


==== Sex and the City (2008) ====

A feature film based on Sex and the City, written, produced, and directed by Michael Patrick King, was released in May 2008. The four lead actresses reprised their roles, along with Chris Noth, Evan Handler, David Eigenberg, Jason Lewis, Mario Cantone, and Willie Garson. Additionally, Jennifer Hudson joined the cast as Carrie's assistant. The film is set four years after the series finale. The film received mixed reviews from critics but emerged as a commercial success at the box-office, becoming the highest-grossing romantic comedy of the year. It was released on DVD on September 23, 2008.


==== Sex and the City 2 (2010) ====

Sex and the City 2 was released in May 2010. The film stars Sarah Jessica Parker, Cynthia Nixon, Kristin Davis, Kim Cattrall, and Chris Noth, all reprising their roles, along with Evan Handler, David Eigenberg, Jason Lewis, Mario Cantone, and Willie Garson. The film also features cameos from Liza Minnelli, Miley Cyrus, and Penélope Cruz. Set two years after the events of the first film, it was critically panned, but proved to be a commercial success at the box-office.


==== Canceled third film ====
In 2016, rumors circulated that a script for the third and final film had been approved. However, on September 28, 2017, Sarah Jessica Parker announced to Extra that the film had been cancelled, stating, "I'm disappointed. We had this beautiful, funny, heartbreaking, joyful, very relatable script and story. It's not just disappointing that we don't get to tell the story and have that experience, but more so for that audience that has been so vocal in wanting another movie." It was reported that Kim Cattrall did not want to be involved in the film after learning of storylines where Mr. Big dies of a heart attack and Samantha receives sexting and nude pictures from Miranda's teenage son Brady. Cattrall later clarified in 2019 that she opted not to appear in a third film, explaining she had "gone past the finish line" portraying the character of Samantha and due to her love for the franchise.
The third movie plot was later reimagined as the 2021 television series And Just Like That…, with Cattrall not returning. Originally billed as a miniseries, it was renewed for a second season, with Cattrall reprising her role in a brief cameo in the season finale.


=== Prequel series ===
The Carrie Diaries is a prequel to the original series, based on the book of the same name by Candace Bushnell. The series premiered on The CW on January 14, 2013, with AnnaSophia Robb portraying a young Carrie Bradshaw. On May 8, 2014, The CW cancelled The Carrie Diaries after two seasons.


=== Adaptations ===
The Brazilian television series Sexo e as Negas was adapted from the original Sex and the City series and premiered on September 16, 2014. This version introduced some notable differences: the four main characters were portrayed by black actresses, and the show was set in the suburbs.


=== And Just Like That... ===

In December 2020, it was reported that the cancelled third movie plot was redeveloped into a television series for HBO Max, without Kim Cattrall's character returning. In January 2021, the revival, titled And Just Like That..., was officially confirmed by HBO Max, with Sarah Jessica Parker, Cynthia Nixon, and Kristin Davis returning.
Originally billed as a limited series, And Just Like That... was renewed for a second season in March 2022, during which Cattrall reprised her role in a cameo for the season finale. In August 2023, the series was renewed for a third and final season. The third season premiered on May 29, 2025 and the final episode aired on August 14, 2025.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Archive of the original Sex and the City official website hbo.com/city
Archive of the original Sex and the City columns in The New York Observer
Sex and the City on Facebook 
Sex and the City at IMDb