Subhi Taha, formerly known as Sbeih.jpg on Instagram, is a Palestinian-Filipino activist and social media content creator. The Instagram account @sbeih.jpg had 1.6 million followers as of August 3, 2024. Meta, the owner of Instagram, disabled the account and its backup account on 6 March 2025.


== Sbeih.jpg ==
Subhi is a half-Palestinian and half-Filipino Muslim content creator living the United States and creating digital narratives in English. His posts were typically about 2 minutes long and sought to create an anti-colonial, Palestine-centered narrative.
Zainab Saeed El-Mansi sees Sbeih.jpg as "a continuation of the Palestinian anti-colonial struggle across colonial borders, against a history of different settler-colonial annihilative strategies, post-Oslo narratives and Arab normalization" and sees the goals of his work as reclaiming Palestinian narrative and agency and mobilizing support for Palestine, as well as "[decolonizing] the hegemonic Western and Zionist colonial digital and media narratives."
El-Mansi places Sbeih.jpg within the post-2010 Palestinian generation of scholars and activists, which Raja Khalidi has characterized as a "younger, radical, and impatient generation of heterodox and activist scholars that departs from, indeed renounces, the preceding trend in studying the realities of Palestinian development" that have "explicitly challenged the prevailing narratives of so-called peace building, including the neoliberal economic policies that underpin much of the post-Oslo literature on Palestinian development."
Sbeih.jpg was among a number of Palestinian accounts that criticized Nas Daily in 2022 for its simplistic representation of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, commenting "I don't feel like it's fair to just clump the history of the Palestinian people and the struggle with just any other struggle... it's much more complex than that."
Posts from Taha were included in an evidence packet for six students associated with the Palestine Solidarity Society at the University of Essex who were under investigation by the university and facing possible expulsion.


== References ==


== External links ==
Subhi on Twitter