Wattpad is a website for reading and publishing original fiction and connecting with fellow writers and readers. Its most popular genres are romance, teen fiction, and fan fiction. As of September 2023, Wattpad has a global audience of more than 90 million users, the majority of whom were younger women, and there are over 665 million story uploads in total.
Some of its stories have been transformed into mainstream novels, TV series, and films, such as the After and The Kissing Booth series. In January 2019, Wattpad launched its own publishing division, Wattpad Books, to simplify publishing for authors. In January 2021, Naver Corporation announced that it would acquire Wattpad, and the deal was completed in May 2021.


== History ==


=== Growth and funding ===
Wattpad was developed in 2006, as the result of a collaboration between Allen Lau and Ivan Yuen. The company is based in Toronto, Ontario. As of January 2018, Wattpad had received almost $117.8M in funding from investors. In 2011, Wattpad announced that it received $3.5M in total funding from its current investors, and from W Media Ventures, Golden Venture Partners, and Union Square Ventures. Then in June 2012, Wattpad raised $17.3M from a group of venture funds led by Khosla Ventures. In April 2014, they announced a $46M Series C of funding led by OMERS ventures. In January 2018, Wattpad announced $51M in funding from Tencent Holdings Limited, BDC, Globe Telecom's Kickstart Ventures, Peterson Group, Canso, and existing investor Raine.


=== Awards ===
In December 2011, Wattpad was selected as the hottest digital media company in the country at the Canadian Innovation Exchange. In the same year, co-founder and CEO Ivan Yuen was recognized as a top Canadian entrepreneur at the Impact Infused Awards, sponsored by Deloitte.In March 2014, Wattpad partnered with Pop Fiction, an imprint of Summit Media, to market Filipino Wattpad stories. Other publishers from the Philippines also publish stories from Wattpad.
Since then, some Wattpad stories have also been adapted into teleseryes. Filipino television network TV5, in partnership with Wattpad and Life is Beautiful Publishing Company, launched Wattpad Presents, a series of Wattpad stories turned into TV dramas. Wattpad stories aired on the show are usually those that were published by LIB Publishing.
ABS-CBN also made several adaptations of Wattpad stories such as "My App Boyfie" by Noreen Capili (noringai), starring James Reid and Nadine Lustre, and the coming-of-age series Bagito starring Nash Aguas, Alexa Ilacad, and Ella Cruz. Pop Fiction's best-selling book, She's Dating the Gangster, written by Bianca Bernardino (SGWannaB) as a Wattpad original, became the first Wattpad story adapted into a full-length motion picture starring Kathryn Bernardo and Daniel Padilla. The movie adaptation was produced by ABS-CBN's film production arm, Star Cinema. Liza Soberano and Enrique Gil also starred in the film Just The Way You Are, based on the Wattpad story "The Bet" by Ilurvbooks. "Chasing Red" was published by isabelleronin, a Filipino-Canadian writer who got more than 200 million views. In 2021, He's Into Her, a novel written by Maxinejiji (Maxine Lat Calibuso), will premiere on iWant TFC, starring Belle Mariano and Donny Pangilinan.GMA Network has also started making adaptations of Wattpad stories via Luv Is, a series of stories turned into dramas similar to that of TV5 but the stories are longer.


=== Competitors ===
Bookmate and the long-established and popular sites FanFiction.Net and Fiction Press (a spin-off site for original fiction) also serve as hubs for online prose. Archive of Our Own or AO3 is another free and open source alternative site. Monogatary.com is named after a stylized romanization of monogatari (物語, 'story'). It is also a novel-centered social networking service about creative writing and illustrations founded in October 2017. RoyalRoad hosts primarily LitRPG and isekai/portal fantasy novels, but also a wide range of other fiction. Scribble Hub primarily hosts LitRPG, isekai, and xianxia, with a significant minority of transgender and other queer fiction.


=== Acquisition by Naver ===
In January 2021, Wattpad announced that it would be acquired by Naver Corporation in a $600 million cash-and-stock deal. Together with Naver's other platform, WEBTOON.com, the acquisition of Wattpad has extended the company's global reach to 166 million people worldwide. In an interview, Lau states: "It's also been very clear from Naver, and we agree, that we should operate as independently as possible." Wattpad will remain headquartered in Canada and under its current leadership.


== Platform Overview ==
According to a June 2009 Wattpad press release, the application had been downloaded over 5 million times. In March 2009, an iPhone version was released. This was followed by the launch of BlackBerry App World in April 2009, on Android in June 2009, and on Apple in April 2010. In December 2015, a Windows version was also released. Currently, Wattpad has more than 90 million users who collectively spend 15 billion minutes each month using Wattpad. As of 2018, there are more than 400 million fan fiction uploads.


=== Sister apps ===
In February 2015, Wattpad launched a second standalone app called "After Dark". The app focuses on the romance genre and is intended for adult readers.
In February 2017, Wattpad launched a chat stories app called Tap, which offers stories in the form of text messages as if reading a private conversation on someone else's phone. The app was an early success, with over 240 million taps in the first few weeks after the launch. On July 28, 2017, Tap launched "Tap Originals." This was a series of original stories produced by writers every week, with some of these series working on an episode-by-episode basis.


=== Paid stories ===
On November 13, 2018, Wattpad introduced "Next Beta" to a few select countries for early testing. The launch of the Next Beta featured over 50 stories that were to be paid for with Watt Coins, which could be earned by having readers spend coins to unlock participating Next Beta stories. This offered writers the chance to earn money through their work and to provide support for readers. Wattpad planned a fast-follow launch for Next Beta in Spanish-speaking regions and to expand the program. The program was available in Latin America and Spain beginning May 27, 2019, before expanding worldwide on July 11 of the same year. On September 17, 2019, the Wattpad Team announced the ending of the Next Beta program after results from the program showed that "Wattpadders are ready for a program that funds writers". The program was later rebranded to "Paid Stories".


=== Wattpad Books ===
On January 24, 2019, Wattpad launched the publishing division Wattpad Books led by Wattpad Studios' Publishing Deputy Manager Ashleigh Gardner, with operations managed by Wattpad Studios' Publishing Director Deanna McFadden. According to CEO Allen Lau, this project was in an effort to take the "guesswork" out of publishing.
The Wattpad Books acquisitions team uses a mix of machine learning algorithms and human editors. The acquisitions team looks to Wattpad's large and existing digital library (over half a billion titles) in order to select notable material for publication. According to Wattpad Books leader Ashleigh Gardner, this is in an effort to combat bias inherent in human editors. Gardner says that this technology analyses the data behind each title, looking at story structure and word use in addition to levels of reader engagement per title. This data is then compared to analyses of other books on Wattpad and in the public domain. Once all the data has been collected and engagement has been looked at, human staffers read the titles and create their lists.
All published titles are a combination of international hits and notable but known material from their digital library. These titles are distributed by Macmillan, Raincoast Books, and Penguin Random House in India and the United Kingdom, with their Fall 2019 list available in leading North American retailers. Outside North America, Gardner has sold the rights to Hachette (France) for Deanna Cameron's What Happened Last Night. Additionally, Lauren Palphreyman's rights to Cupid's Match have been sold in French (Hachette) and German (S. Fischer Verlag).
Wattpad's first list consisted of six young adult novels. The QB Bad Boy & Me by Tay Marley (28.8 million reads) will be their lead title and was slated for release on August 13, 2019. The remaining five books will be released between September and October 2019 and include: Trapeze by Leigh Ansell (2.5 million reads), What Happened That Night by Deanna Cameron (over 1 million reads), Saving Everest by Sky Reads (17.2 million reads), Cupid's Match by Lauren Palphreyman (46.4 million reads), and I'm a Gay Wizard by V.S. Santoni (404,000 reads). Wattpad hopes to publish 18 titles in their 2020 list.
Besides Wattpad Books, Wattpad announced a partnership with Anvil Publishing, Inc., one of the Philippines' leading publishers, to create Bliss Books, a YA imprint with Filipino young adults and romance fanatics as their target market. In February 2007, Wattpad announced the addition of over 17,000 e-books from Project Gutenberg, making them available to mobile users. 


=== Statistics ===
As of September 2020:

More than 80% of its traffic and usage comes from mobile devices
The site has 90 million monthly users
There were over 665 million story uploads in total
70% of users are female, 80% of whom are millennials or Gen Z
As of 2018, nearly 300,000 writers from 35 countries took part in Wattpad's yearly writing competition, The Watty Awards.


== Platform usage ==


=== Publishing ===
Famous authors such as Margaret Atwood and R. L. Stine have also joined Wattpad. Atwood has posted poetry and judged a poetry contest on the platform. Stine has used Wattpad to post chapters of his books and has done interactive events with readers.
Wattpad has formed ties with publishing houses to try to help Wattpad authors receive compensation for their works. A new branch, Wattpad Studios, was developed to connect popular writers to both the publishing and film industries. Wattpad has, in the past, teamed up with publishing groups such as Sourcebooks to help Wattpad authors receive book deals and get their work into hard copies. More traditional publishing houses such as Random House and HarperCollins have approached popular Wattpad writers to negotiate publishing deals, allowing the website to serve as a springboard into the more traditional publishing industry.
Author Anna Todd, whose work After has received over a billion reads on the site, was given a publishing deal with Simon & Schuster to turn her online work into a multiple-book published saga. A film version starring Josephine Langford, Hero Fiennes Tiffin, Selma Blair, Jennifer Beals, Peter Gallagher, and Shane Paul McGhie was released by Aviron Pictures on April 12, 2019.


=== Fan fiction ===
Wattpad has increased in popularity among many fandoms, who take to the platform to craft their own fan fiction. One of the most notable stories on the platform is the After series by Anna Todd, which was originally published as Harry Styles fan fiction. After its large popularity amongst the One Direction fandom and the app's readers, the story became the most-read book on Wattpad, having achieved just under 10 million unique readers on the platform and has been read more than one billion times. The series went on to be published by Gallery Books and became a New York Times Best Seller.
By crafting a spot for fanfiction alongside its other genres, Wattpad prioritizes its teen readers and gives the platform a twist.  Deputy General Manager, Ashleigh Gardner, added the following about the genre: "What's unique about Wattpad is that fanfic is treated like any other genre, living alongside other forms of fiction. This makes it more fluid for readers of original fiction to discover a new fanfic, or inspire a fanfiction writer to start a new story and bring their audience along with them."
Fan fiction is the third-largest category on Wattpad, closely behind Romance and Teen Fiction, many of which are also fan fiction.


=== Contests ===
Wattpad hosts a number of writing contests each year, including the annual Watty Awards, the largest writing competition in the world. In 2011, The Watty Awards introduced three entry levels (Popular, On The Rise, and Undiscovered) to allow greater chances of winning for every type of writer. Contests are open to anyone who has a Wattpad account.
During the summer of 2012, Wattpad in collaboration with Margaret Atwood, Canadian poet/novelist/literary critic, held the "Wattys": the first major poetry contest offering a chance to poets on Wattpad to compete against each other in one of two categories, either as an "Enthusiast" or a "Competitor". It has been going on ever since, and now the contest is open to books of all genres.


=== Entertainment ===
Wattpad WEBTOON studios has brought fan-created content both to the cinema and to streaming services, including Netlifx, Hulu, Amazon Prime Video, and others. 
Netflix film The Kissing Booth was written in 2011 by author Beth Reekles. It originated as a story on Wattpad where it won a Watty Award for "Most Popular Teen Fiction" in Wattpad's annual writing contest. By 2012 it had amassed over 19 million reads on Wattpad and, in 2013, was published by Penguin Random House. In an interview with Forbes, Reekles explains what drew her to Wattpad: "I loved the feeling of community on the site, and when I began to share, I liked the anonymity of it because I was so self-conscious about my writing and hadn't shared it with anyone before."
Netflix's The Kissing Booth premiered on May 11, 2018 and stars Joey King, Jacob Elordi, and Joel Courtney. Co-CEO of Netflix, Ted Sarandos, called it "one of the most-watched movies in the country, and maybe in the world". The Kissing Booth was the fourth most popular movie in IMDb's popularity rankings in June 2018. Wattpad has also signed deals with Asian distribution partners, such as pan-Asian streaming platform Iflix to co-produce dozens of original movies based on Wattpad stories out of Indonesia, and Singapore's Mediacorp, to bring Wattpad stories to Mediacorp's FTA channels such as Channel 5 (with exception of CNA) and its streaming service Toggle.
Since After premiered in cinema in 2019, a four further sequel films have been released in a short period of time. This pattern is redolent of the continuative nature of Wattpad fan fiction. They are titled After We Collided (2020), After We Fell (2021), After Ever Happy (2022), and After Everything (2023). The films retain a similar 'fandom' fanbase structure to the original fan fiction and published novels. While the films have performed well financially, they have also been met with negative reviews concerning cinematographic quality.
On December 8, 2021, it was announced that ViacomCBS would be partnering with Wattpad to produce some of its original stories.
Wattpad, with AwesomenessTV, produced Hulu's popular Light as a Feather based on the book by Zoe Aarsen, which received ten Daytime Emmy Award nominations.
A Netflix television adaptation of the Wattpad novel My Life with the Walter Boys by Ali Novak was released in December 2023. The second season was released in August of 2025, with a third season confirmed to be in the works.


== Criticisms and controversies ==
In April 2024, Wattpad announced that it would be removing a private messaging (PM) feature from the platform in response to a report on sexual grooming in PMs.
Wattpad has stated that the feature has "only been relevant to a small percentage of our user base" and removing it could foster "transparent dialogue." However, proponents of retaining private messaging have stated that private messaging allows for collaboration among other things.


=== June 2020 data breach ===
In June 2020, Wattpad suffered a huge data breach that exposed almost 270 million records. The data was initially sold before being published on a public hacking forum where it was widely circulated. The incident exposed extensive personal information including names and usernames, email and IP addresses, genders of users, birth dates, and passwords stored as bcrypt hashes.
Later that same year on July 14, researchers at Risk Based Security discovered that a threat actor from an unknown source was responsible for the breach, along with the sourcing of over 278 million password credentials and email addresses, with breakdown analysis suggesting that Gmail, Yahoo, and Outlook accounts were mostly affected. The Wattpad Corporation has since investigated and patched the issue.


=== Countries restricting access to Wattpad ===


==== China ====
Access to Wattpad from within mainland China is restricted. Censorship in China covers topics such as LGBTQ+ content, which censors consider to be immoral.


==== Russia ====
Wattpad could be restricted in Russia in response to legal crackdown on LGBTQ propaganda. Already, similar platforms like Archive of Our Own and Ficbook have been banned for promoting 'non-traditional sexual relations.'


==== Turkey ====
In July 2024, a Turkish court, the Ankara 10th Penal Court of Peace, ordered that access to Wattpad be blocked. As of July 18, 2024, users within Turkey have been unable to access the site without the use of a VPN. This makes Turkey the first country to officially restrict access to the site.


=== Concerns over Generative Artificial Intelligence in writing ===
Wattpad users have expressed concerns over AI-generated stories on the platform, claiming the ability to produce content quickly is an unfair advantage. In a 2024 poll, Wattpad found that while 90% of readers and authors believe these technologies will play a role in the future of reading, more than 92% believe it is important that humans remain involved in writing and producing books.  43% of respondents had concerns over whether AI could limit economic or publishing opportunities and 23% were worried that AI would threaten cultural inclusivity and authenticity. 


=== Copyright issues ===
Early in its history, some large volumes of user-uploaded material hosted on Wattpad were copyrighted material created by authors who did not grant republication rights. In May 2009, an article in The New York Times noted, "Sites like Scribd and Wattpad, which invite users to upload documents like college theses and self-published novels, have been the target of industry grumbling in recent weeks, as illegal reproductions of popular titles have turned up on them".
The Wattpad website notes, "We do not welcome upload of material that violates its copyright terms," but also states "It is simply not possible to screen and verify all posted content." In response to industry criticism, in April 2009 (before the publication of the New York Times article that named Wattpad as a vehicle for user-generated e-book infringement) Wattpad announced an "Authors In Charge" program, designed to allow authors or their representatives to identify and directly remove infringing content from the site, but this program is designed specifically for "authors with published books for sale." Authors may begin their stories on Wattpad and then choose to publish their work. In most cases, the work on Wattpad is only a sample to ensure funds go to them in regard to their writing.


== Effects on writers ==
According to a study, online writing communities like Wattpad help young writers learn and grow their craft through constructive feedback and criticism. Composed of students and their experiences on online writing platforms, the study aims to show how constructive criticism affects their writing process. Most participants prefer serious feedback over subtle critiquing, based on the results.
Wattpad, as well as similar online writing communities, help young authors build and construct their self-perception as writers, as well as establish an audience and interact with readers. It acts as a gateway into the publishing realm and offers hands-on experience with digital writing. This type of experience helps writers develop personal authorship. Claudia Tan, author of Perfect Addiction, described Wattpad as “a training ground to hone my writing skills.”
Readers on Wattpad are able to comment on specific paragraphs and lines within the texts they read. Such comments are available to be viewed by all readers and the author themselves, acting as a form of feedback for the writer.


== References ==