The Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) is a women's professional basketball league in the United States. The league comprises 13 teams (scheduled to expand to 15 by 2026 and 18 by 2030). The WNBA is headquartered in Midtown Manhattan.
The WNBA was founded on April 24, 1996, as the women's counterpart to the National Basketball Association (NBA); league play began in 1997. The regular season runs from May to September, with each team playing 44 games. The top eight teams (regardless of conference) qualify for the playoffs, culminating in the WNBA Finals, which is played in October.
The All-Star Game occurs midway through the season in July. The league hosts an annual mid-season competition, the Commissioner's Cup. The WNBA is an active member of USA Basketball (USAB), which is recognized by the International Basketball Federation (FIBA) as the governing body for basketball in the United States.


== History ==


=== League founded and play begins (1996–1997) ===
The creation of the WNBA was officially approved by the NBA Board of Governors on April 24, 1996, and announced at a press conference with Rebecca Lobo, Lisa Leslie, and Sheryl Swoopes in attendance. The new WNBA had to compete with the recently formed American Basketball League, another professional women's basketball league that began play in the fall of 1996, but would cease operation during its 1998–99 season.
The WNBA began with eight teams: the Charlotte Sting, Cleveland Rockers, Houston Comets, and New York Liberty in the Eastern Conference; and the Los Angeles Sparks, Phoenix Mercury, Sacramento Monarchs, and Utah Starzz in the Western Conference.
While not the first major women's professional basketball league in the United States (a distinction held by the defunct WBL), the WNBA is the only league to receive full backing of the NBA. The WNBA logo, "Logo Woman", paralleled the NBA logo and was selected out of 50 different designs.
On the heels of a much-publicized gold medal run by the USA Basketball Women's National Team at the 1996 Summer Olympic Games, the WNBA then began its first season on June 21, 1997. The first WNBA game featured the New York Liberty facing the Los Angeles Sparks in Los Angeles. The Liberty defeated the Sparks 67–57. A crowd of 14,284 attended the game at the Great Western Forum in Inglewood, California. The game was televised nationally in the United States on the NBC television network. At the start of the 1997 season, the WNBA had television deals in with NBC (NBA rights holder), ESPN, and Lifetime. Penny Toler scored the league's first point.


=== Houston domination and league expansion (1997–2000) ===
The WNBA centered its marketing campaign, dubbed "We Got Next," around stars Rebecca Lobo, Lisa Leslie, and Sheryl Swoopes. In the league's first season, Leslie's Los Angeles Sparks underperformed, and Swoopes sat out much of the season due to her pregnancy. Perhaps the WNBA's first star was MVP Cynthia Cooper, Swoopes' teammate on the Houston Comets. The Comets defeated Lobo's New York Liberty in the first WNBA championship game. The initial "We Got Next" advertisement ran before each season until it was replaced with a "We Got Game" campaign.

Two teams were added in 1998 (Detroit and Washington), and two more in 1999 (Orlando and Minnesota), bringing the total number of teams in the league up to 12. The 1999 season began with a collective bargaining agreement between players and the league, marking the first collective bargaining agreement to be signed in the history of women's professional sports. That year, the WNBA also announced that it would add four more teams for the 2000 season (the Indiana Fever, the Seattle Storm, the Miami Sol, and the Portland Fire), bringing the league up to 16 teams. WNBA president Val Ackerman discussed expansion by saying, "This won't be the end of it. We expect to keep growing the league."
In 1999, the league's chief competition, the American Basketball League (ABL), declared bankruptcy. Many of the ABL's star players, including several Olympic gold medalists (such as Nikki McCray and Dawn Staley) and a number of standout college performers (including Kate Starbird and Jennifer Rizzotti), joined the rosters of WNBA teams, enhancing the overall quality of play in the league. When a lockout resulted in an abbreviated NBA season, the WNBA saw faltering TV viewership.
On May 23, 2000, the Houston Comets became the first WNBA team to be invited to the White House Rose Garden. Before this invitation, only men's sports teams had traveled to the White House. At the end of the 2000 season, the Houston Comets won their fourth championship, capturing every title since the league's inception. Led by the "Big Three" of Sheryl Swoopes, Tina Thompson, and Cynthia Cooper (who won the Finals MVP for all four championships), the Comets dominated every team in the league. Under head coach Van Chancellor, the team posted a 98–24 record their first four seasons (16–3 in the playoffs). After 2000, Cooper retired from the league, and the Comets' dynasty came to an end.


=== L.A. Sparks success; new league ownership and contraction (2001–2002) ===

The Los Angeles Sparks had the best record during the 2001 WNBA season. Led by Lisa Leslie, the Sparks posted a regular-season record of 28–4 and advanced to their first WNBA Finals, sweeping the Charlotte Sting.
Looking to repeat in 2002, the Sparks again made a strong run toward the postseason, going 25–7 in the regular season under head coach Michael Cooper, who formerly played for the Los Angeles Lakers. Again, Leslie dominated her opponents throughout the Playoffs, leading the Sparks to a perfect 6–0 record, beating the New York Liberty in the 2002 Finals.
Teams and the league were collectively owned by the NBA until the end of 2002, when the NBA sold WNBA teams either to their NBA counterparts in the same city or to a third party as a result of the dot-com bubble. This led to two teams moving: Utah moved to San Antonio, and Orlando moved to Connecticut and became the first WNBA team to be owned by a third party instead of an NBA franchise. This sale of teams also led to two teams folding, the Miami Sol and Portland Fire, because new owners could not be found.


=== Bill Laimbeer leaves his mark (2003–2006) ===

The Women's National Basketball Players Association (WNBPA) threatened to strike in 2003 if a new deal was not worked out between players and the league. The result was a delay in the start of the 2003 preseason and the 2003 WNBA draft. As a result of the strike, the league received negative publicity.
Former Detroit Pistons forward, Bill Laimbeer, took over the Detroit Shock in 2002 as head coach and general manager. He had high hopes for the Detroit Shock, despite the team having gone just 9–23 its previous season. Three Shock members made it the 2003 All-Star Game (Swin Cash, Cheryl Ford, and Deanna Nolan) and Laimbeer orchestrated a worst-to-first turnaround with the Shock finishing the season 25–9 and in first place in the Eastern Conference. After winning the first two rounds of the Playoffs, the Shock faced two-time champion, Los Angeles Sparks, and Lisa Leslie in the 2003 Finals. The Shock defeated the Los Angeles Sparks, winning Game Three on a three-pointer by Deanna Nolan.

After the 2003 season, the Cleveland Rockers, one of the league's original eight teams, folded because its owners were unwilling to continue operating the franchise.
Val Ackerman, the first WNBA president, resigned effective February 1, 2005, citing the desire to spend more time with her family. Ackerman later became president of USA Basketball. On February 15, 2005, NBA commissioner David Stern announced that Donna Orender, who had been serving as the senior vice president of the PGA Tour and who had played for several teams in the now-defunct Women's Pro Basketball League, would be Ackerman's successor as of April 2005.
The WNBA awarded an expansion team to Chicago (later named the Chicago Sky) in February 2005. In the off-season, a set of rule changes was approved that made the WNBA more like the NBA.
In 2006, the league reached a milestone as the first team-oriented women's professional sports league to exist for ten consecutive seasons. On the occasion of the tenth anniversary, the WNBA released its All-Decade Team, comprising the ten WNBA players who had contributed, through on-court play and off-court activities, the most to women's basketball during the league's existence.
After not making it to the Finals in 2004 and 2005, the Shock bounced back in 2006 behind newly acquired Katie Smith, along with six remaining members from their 2003 Finals run (Cash, Ford, Holland-Corn, Nolan, Powell, and Riley). The Shock finished second in the Eastern Conference and knocked out first-seeded Connecticut in the second round of the Playoffs. The Shock faced reigning champion Sacramento Monarchs in a five-game series, winning in Game Five on their home floor.


=== Bringing "Paul Ball" to the WNBA (2007–2009) ===

In December 2006, the Charlotte Bobcats organization announced it would no longer operate the Charlotte Sting. Soon after, the WNBA announced that the Sting would not operate for 2007. A dispersal draft was held on January 8, 2007. Teams selected in inverse order of their 2006 records with the Chicago Sky receiving the first pick.
Former Los Angeles Lakers championship coach, Paul Westhead, was named head coach of the Phoenix Mercury on October 11, 2005, bringing his up-tempo style of play to the WNBA. This fast-paced offense was perfect for his team, especially after the league shortened the shot clock from 30 seconds to 24 seconds in 2006. Much like the early Houston Comets championship teams, the Phoenix Mercury had risen to prominence led by their own "Big Three" of Cappie Pondexter, Diana Taurasi, and Penny Taylor.
The Mercury were well-suited for the fast offense driven by their three stars. Phoenix averaged a league-record 88.97 points per game in 2007. Other teams could not keep up with their new style of play, and the Mercury were propelled into first place in the Western Conference. Facing the reigning champions, the Detroit Shock, the Mercury imposed their high-scoring offense with hopes of capturing their first title in franchise history. Averaging 93.2 points per game in the 2007 Finals, the Mercury beat Detroit on their home floor in front of 22,076 fans in game five to claim their first-ever WNBA title.
In October 2007, the WNBA awarded another expansion franchise to Atlanta. Atlanta businessman Ron Terwilliger was the original owner of the new team. Citizens of Atlanta were voted for their choice of the new team's nickname and colors. The Atlanta Dream, as they were named, played their first regular-season game on May 17, 2008, losing to the Connecticut Sun 67–100.

Paul Westhead resigned from the Mercury after capturing the 2007 title and Penny Taylor opted to stay home to prepare for the 2008 Summer Olympics, causing the Mercury to falter in 2008. The team posted a 16–18 record and became the first team in WNBA history to miss the Playoffs after winning the championship in the previous season. In their place, the Detroit Shock won their third championship under coach Bill Laimbeer, solidifying their place in WNBA history before Laimbeer resigned early in 2009, effectively ending the Shock dynasty.
During the 2008 regular season, the first-ever outdoor professional basketball game in North America was played at Arthur Ashe Stadium in New York City. The Indiana Fever defeated the New York Liberty 71–55 in front of over 19,000 fans.
Late in 2008, the WNBA took over ownership of one of the league's original franchises, the Houston Comets. The Comets ceased operations on December 1, 2008, after no owners for the franchise could be found. A dispersal draft took place on December 8, 2008, with the first pick, Sancho Lyttle, taken by the Atlanta Dream.
After an unsatisfying conclusion in 2008, the Mercury looked to bounce back to championship caliber. New head coach Corey Gaines implemented Paul Westhead's style of play, and the Mercury averaged 92.82 points per game throughout the 2009 season. Helped by the return of Penny Taylor, the Mercury once again locked up first place in the Western Conference and advanced to the 2009 Finals. The championship series was a battle of contrasting styles as the Mercury (number one league offense, 92.82 points per game) had to face the Indiana Fever (number three league defense, 73.55 points per game). The series went five games, including arguably one of the most thrilling games in WNBA history in game one of the series (Phoenix winning in overtime,  120–116). The Mercury beat the Fever in game five, this time on their home court, capturing their second WNBA championship.
Not only did Paul Westhead's system influence his Mercury team, but it created a domino effect throughout the league. Young athletic players were capable of scoring more and playing at a faster pace. As a league, the 2010 average of 80.35 points per game was the best, far surpassing the 69.2 average in the league's inaugural season.


=== Changing of the guard (2010–2012) ===

On October 20, 2009, the WNBA announced that the Detroit Shock would relocate to Tulsa, Oklahoma, to become the Tulsa Shock. On November 20, 2009, the WNBA announced that the Sacramento Monarchs had folded due to lack of support from its current owners, the Maloof family, who were also the owners of the Sacramento Kings at the time. The league announced it would seek new owners to relocate the team to the San Francisco Bay Area; however, no ownership was found and a dispersal draft was held on December 14, 2009.
The 2010 season saw a tight race in the East, with three teams being tied for first place on the final day of the regular season. Five of the six teams in the East were in first place at some point during the season. The East held a .681 winning percentage over the West, its highest ever. In the 2010 Finals, two new teams represented each conference: the Seattle Storm and the Atlanta Dream. Seattle made their first finals appearance since winning it all in 2004, and Atlanta, coming into the playoffs as a four seed, impressively swept its opponents in the first two rounds to advance to the Finals in only the third year of the team's existence.
After the 2010 season, President Orender announced she would be resigning from her position as of December 31. On April 21, 2011, NBA commissioner David Stern announced that former Girl Scouts of the USA Senior Vice President and Chief Marketing Officer, Laurel J. Richie, would assume duties as president on May 16, 2011.

The 2011 season began with strong publicity brought on by the rising young stars of the league and the NBA lockout. The 2011 NBA lockout began on July 1, 2011. Unlike the previous lockout, which affected the WNBA, president Laurel J. Richie confirmed that this lockout would not affect the WNBA. If the NBA season was shortened or canceled, the 2012 WNBA season (including the WNBA teams still owned by NBA owners) would run as planned. The lockout ended on November 26, and NBA teams would play a 66-game regular season following the lockout.
Many news outlets began covering the league more frequently. NBA TV, the television home of the NBA scheduled over 70 regular-season games to be televised (along with a dozen more on ESPN2 and ABC). The new influx of young talent into the league gave many teams something to be excited about. Players like Candace Parker of the Sparks, Maya Moore of the Lynx, DeWanna Bonner of the Mercury, Angel McCoughtry of the Dream, Sylvia Fowles of the Sky, Tina Charles of the Sun, and Liz Cambage of the Shock brought a new level of excitement to the game, adding talent to the teams of young veterans such as Diana Taurasi, Seimone Augustus and Cappie Pondexter. The level of play seemed to be evidenced by higher scoring, better defense, and higher shooting percentages. By the end of the 2011 regular season, nine of the twelve teams in the league had increased attendance over their 2010 averages.
Connecticut Sun center, Tina Charles, set a league record for double-doubles in a season with 23. Also, Sylvia Fowles of the Chicago Sky became only the second player in WNBA history to finish a season averaging at least 20 points (20.0ppg) and 10 rebounds (10.2rpg) per game. The San Antonio Silver Stars experienced boosts from their young players as well; rookie Danielle Adams scored 32 points off the bench in June and fellow rookie Danielle Robinson had a 36-point game in September. Atlanta Dream forward, Angel McCoughtry, was the first player in league history to average over 20 points per game (21.6ppg) while playing under 30 minutes per game (27.9mpg).
McCoughtry led her team to the 2011 Finals, appearing for the second straight year, but despite breaking her own Finals scoring record, the Dream were swept for the second straight year, this time by the Minnesota Lynx, which won its first title behind a fully healthy Seimone Augustus.
2012 featured a long Olympic break. The Indiana Fever won that year's WNBA championship.


=== The Three to See (2013–2019) ===

The much-publicized 2013 WNBA draft produced Baylor University star Brittney Griner, Delaware's Elena Delle Donne, and Notre Dame All American Skylar Diggins as the top three picks. The draft was the first to be televised in primetime on ESPN. Griner, Delle Donne, and Diggins were thus labeled "The Three To See." The retirement of legends Katie Smith, Tina Thompson, Ticha Penicheiro, and Sheryl Swoopes coupled with the arrival of highly touted rookies and new rule changes effectively marked the end of an era for the WNBA and the ushering of another.
On the court, the Minnesota Lynx won their second title in three years, defeating the Atlanta Dream in the 2013 Finals and becoming the first team to sweep the playoff series since the Seattle Storm.
The promotion of Griner, Delle Donne, and Diggins helped boost television ratings for the league by 28 percent, and half of the teams ended the season profitable. The improved health of the league was on display after the season, when the Los Angeles Sparks' ownership group folded; it took the league only a few weeks to line up Guggenheim Partners to purchase the team, and the franchise also garnered interest from the ownership of the Golden State Warriors.
Two more franchise relocations happened in the following years, as the Tulsa Shock moved in 2016 to the Dallas–Fort Worth region in Texas and were renamed the Dallas Wings, and in 2018 the San Antonio Stars went to Nevada, becoming the Las Vegas Aces.


=== New CBA and Commissioner's Cup plans (2020) ===
During the 2018 season, the WNBA players' union opted out of the collective bargaining agreement (CBA) with the league, which ended after the 2019 season. In January 2020, the league and union announced that they had reached an agreement on a new CBA to take effect with the 2020 season and running through 2027. Among the features of the new agreement were:

Total player compensation increased by slightly more than 50%. While most of this increase went to star players, all players benefited to some degree, and both sides were interested mainly in limiting, if not eliminating, overseas play by the league's top players.
Players were able to reach unrestricted free agency a year earlier than before. The previous CBA allowed a team to designate a player as "core"—similar to the NFL's franchise tag—four times. This dropped to three in 2020 and dropped further to two in 2022.
All player air travel to regular-season games would be, at a minimum, premium economy class. Also, each player would have her own hotel room for road games.
Players would receive their full salary while on maternity leave. Additionally, an annual childcare stipend of $5,000 per player would be provided; teams would make apartments of at least two bedrooms available to players with children, and add facilities for nursing mothers; and the league would offer family planning benefits that would allow up to a $60,000 reimbursement for veteran players for expenses related to adoption, surrogacy, embryo preservation, or infertility treatment.
The CBA would begin penalizing veteran players for late arrival at WNBA training camps. By the sixth year of the CBA, players with more than 2 years of service who missed the start of training camp would be suspended for the season. Exceptions included serious injury, national team commitments for non-US players, college graduations, and other significant life events.
The CBA also addressed the issue of players serving on NBA coaching staffs during the traditional basketball season. This came to a head during the 2019 offseason when the Washington Wizards, owned by the same company that owns the WNBA's Mystics, hired Mystics player Kristi Toliver as an assistant. Under the previous CBA, teams were allowed to allocate only $50,000 per year to players as an enticement to not play overseas. Because of the Mystics' and Wizards' shared ownership, the Wizards could only pay Toliver from the Mystics' $50,000 allocation—most of which had already been committed to Elena Delle Donne, who normally did not go overseas. With the new CBA, veteran players could work as coaches in the NBA without a salary limit, regardless of the team's ownership structure.
Also in January 2020, the WNBA announced a new in-season tournament, the Commissioner's Cup, which would begin with the 2020 season. Each team was scheduled to play 10 Cup games during the season—specifically, the first home and road games against each team in its conference. The final Cup games were to be played in July, with the top team in the Cup standings from each conference advancing to a one-off Cup final in August.
The 2020 WNBA schedule originally included a month-long break in July and August to allow players to participate in the 2020 Tokyo Olympics.  The 2020 games were postponed until 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, rendering the break unnecessary.  On April 3, 2020, the WNBA announced that the beginning of its own schedule would be postponed. The 2020 entry draft took place as originally scheduled on April 17, although it was done remotely. No details of the revised schedule were announced as of the time of the draft, and the Commissioner's Cup was ultimately not held in 2020.


==== 2020 season at IMG Academy ====
In June 2020, WNBA commissioner Cathy Engelbert announced plans for the league to have a 22-game regular season, and a traditional playoff format, to be held exclusively at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Florida. The players were housed at the Bradenton complex, and all games and practices took place there. Players had until June 25 to let their teams know whether they planned to participate.


=== "Count It" campaign and expansion (2021–present) ===

On March 15, 2021, an announcement was made that the WNBA would introduce a ceremonial logo, basketball, and uniforms as part of its 25th anniversary celebratory campaign called "Count It". As part of the campaign, the league unveiled The W25, a list of 25 players determined to be the league's greatest and most influential, as chosen by a panel of media and pioneering women's players.
The delayed launch of the Commissioner's Cup was officially announced on May 12, 2021, two days before the start of the regular season. The originally planned schedule, with the first home game and first road game of each team against each of its fellow conference members doubling as Cup games, was maintained. All Cup games within each conference were played before the league took its Olympic break after July 11. The Cup final, officially termed the Commissioner's Cup Championship Game, involves the conference leaders in the Cup standings; its first edition was held on August 12 as the league's first game after the Olympic break, and was streamed via Amazon Prime Video. A prize pool of $500,000 is provided for the Cup, with players on the winning team guaranteed a minimum bonus of $30,000 and those of the losing team guaranteed $10,000, with the championship game MVP receiving an extra $5,000.
In February 2022, the league raised $75 million in capital, on terms valuing the league at $475 million. Under the deal, investors received 16 percent of the league's equity. In mid-2022, Cathy Engelbert said that the WNBA hoped to identify one or two cities for expansion either by the start of that year's playoffs or by the end of the year, with the teams starting play as early as the 2024 season. The WNBA narrowed its list of potential cities from 100 to 20 to 10. The league would evaluate each city based on 25 metrics in the categories of viewership, fan data, psychographics, sports benchmarks, and demographics. There were constant demands for expansion as Engelbert was commissioner with lottery picks cut during their first season and long-time veterans cut during training camp due to the limited number of roster spots in the league.
On September 26, 2023, The Athletic reported that the co-owners of the Golden State Warriors, Joe Lacob and Peter Guber, were finalizing an agreement to start an expansion team in San Francisco. On October 5, 2023, the agreement was formally announced. The Valkyries, which began playing in 2025 at the Chase Center, are headquartered in Oakland, and were the league's first expansion team since the Atlanta Dream in 2008. There was an expansion draft in December 2024. It was reported that the expansion fee for the team was $50 million over ten years. On the same date, WNBA commissioner Cathy Engelbert said that she expected the WNBA to add a fourteenth team by 2025, and mentioned that there were groups expressing serious interest in a franchise in Denver, Philadelphia, Portland, Sacramento, and Toronto. On May 23, 2024, it was officially announced that the Kilmer Group had acquired a franchise based in Toronto that will debut in 2026. On August 31, 2024, it was reported that the Bhathal family, owners of the Portland Thorns of the National Women's Soccer League (NWSL), was in negotiations to acquire a franchise based in Portland. The new Portland expansion team was officially announced on September 18, 2024, and will also debut in 2026.
On June 30, 2025, the WNBA announced expansion teams in Cleveland, Detroit, and Philadelphia. The Cleveland team is scheduled to begin play in 2028, followed by Detroit in 2029, and Philadelphia in 2030.


=== 2025 CBA negotiations ===
In July 2025, during the WNBA All-Star Weekend, the WNBA players union and the league officials had a meeting regarding a new collective bargaining agreement (CBA). The current CBA, which was signed in 2020, was set to expire in 2027, but in October 2024 the WNBPA exercised its right to opt out of the agreement that now lasts through October 31, 2025. More than 40 players were present at the meeting, which they described as a "missed opportunity", as both sides did not get any closer to a new deal. Meanwhile, Engelbert painted the conversation as "very constructive". Players have said that revenue sharing, salary structure, and prioritization are some of the key issues that they do not agree on. On July 19, before the All-Star Game, all players wore "Pay Us What You Owe Us" T-shirts during warmups and fans chanted "pay them!" in support after the game. In August, representatives of the WNBA and the WNBPA had another meeting in New York to continue the negotiations. On October 30th, the WNBA and the WNBPA agreed to an extension, pushing the deadline for the CBA expiration for 30 days, until November 30. On November 30, the WNBA and the WNBPA agreed to a second extension, now pushing expiration deadline until January 9, 2026.  If both sides don't reach an agreement before the CBA expires, the league could experience a lockout, which has never happened in its history.


== Teams ==

The WNBA originated with 8 teams in 1997, and through a sequence of expansions, contractions, and relocations will consist of 13 teams as of the 2025 season and a total of 19 franchises in WNBA history.
As of the 2025 season, the Las Vegas Aces (formerly known as the Utah Starzz and San Antonio (Silver) Stars), Los Angeles Sparks, New York Liberty, and Phoenix Mercury are the only remaining franchises that were founded in 1997.
Arenas listed below reflect those in use during the 2025 season.


=== Future teams ===


=== Timeline ===


=== Relationship with NBA teams ===


==== Share ownership ====
WNBA teams affiliated with an NBA team from the same market are known as sister teams. These include the New York Liberty and Brooklyn Nets, the Indiana Fever and Pacers, the Minnesota Lynx and Timberwolves, the Phoenix Mercury and Suns, the Washington Mystics and Wizards, the Golden State Valkyries and Warriors, and future expansion teams the Toronto Tempo (2026) and Raptors, Cleveland (2028) and the Cavaliers, Detroit (2029) and the Pistons, and Philadelphia (2030) and the 76ers. Of these teams, only the Mystics and Tempo don't share an arena with their NBA counterpart.
The Liberty were previously associated with the New York Knicks, having been owned by the Knicks' parent company, the Madison Square Garden Company, but the team was sold in January 2019 to a group led by Joseph Tsai, then a minority owner of the Brooklyn Nets and now sole owner of that team. The Liberty, which played at Madison Square Garden until 2017 and at Westchester County Center in suburban White Plains in 2018 and 2019, were then relocated to the Nets' home arena, Barclays Center, in downtown Brooklyn.


==== Share market with an NBA team, but not ownership ====
Amongst the WNBA teams that are in the same market as an NBA team, but are independently owned, are the Chicago Sky, who are not affiliated with the Bulls and play in a separate arena from their NBA counterpart.
The Detroit Shock was the sister team of the Pistons until the teams' owner sold the Shock to investors who moved the team to Tulsa, Oklahoma. The franchise relocated again in 2016, this time to the Dallas–Fort Worth metro area to become the Dallas Wings. However, the Wings are not affiliated with the Mavericks and also play in a separate arena.
While the Atlanta Dream shared State Farm Arena with the Hawks from 2008 to 2016 and again in 2019, the Hawks never held any ownership stake in the WNBA team. The Los Angeles Sparks share an arena with the Lakers, but not ownership.  However, Lakers' legend Magic Johnson has an ownership stake in the Sparks.
The future Portland Fire plans to start play in the Trail Blazers' home of Moda Center, but does not share ownership with the NBA team; the WNBA team instead shares ownership with the Portland Thorns of the National Women's Soccer League.


==== Do not share market with an NBA team ====
Three teams do not share a market with an NBA counterpart. The Orlando Miracle was the sister team of the Magic until the team was sold to the Mohegan Sun casino, who relocated the franchise to Connecticut to become the Sun.
The Utah Starzz were affiliated with the Jazz before relocating to San Antonio as the Silver Stars in 2003. The Silver Stars (shortened to Stars in 2014) were then paired with the San Antonio Spurs from 2003 through the 2017 season, but that relationship ended in October 2017 when the Stars were bought by MGM Resorts International and moved to Las Vegas to become the Aces.
The Seattle Storm was formerly the sister team of the SuperSonics, but was sold to a Seattle-based group when the SuperSonics relocated to become the Oklahoma City Thunder.


== Season format ==


=== Regular season ===
Teams hold training camps in May that allow the coaching staff to prepare the players for the regular season and determine the 12-woman roster with which they will begin the regular season. After training camp, a series of preseason exhibition games are held.
The WNBA regular season begins in May. In 2023 and 2024, each team played 40 regular-season games, 20 each home and away. With the Golden State Valkyries joining the league in 2025, the regular season expanded to 44 games. As in the NBA, each team hosts and visits every other team at least once every season.
During years in which the Summer Olympics are held, the WNBA takes a month off in the middle of the season to allow players to practice and compete with their respective national teams. During years in which the FIBA World Cup is held, the WNBA either takes a break for the World Cup or ends its season early, depending on the scheduling of the World Cup.


=== Commissioner's Cup ===

The 2020 season was planned to be the first for the Commissioner's Cup, an in-season tournament. Each team's first home and away games against each of its conference opponents, all of which were to be played in the first half of the season, were designated as Cup games. After each team played its 10 Cup games, the top team in each conference's Cup standings would advance to the Commissioner's Cup Final, a single match held in August. The COVID-19 pandemic caused the tournament to be scrapped for the time being; the tournament instead launched in 2021 under the originally announced format.
The format was changed for the 2024 season. Each team now plays only one Commissioner's Cup game against each team in its conference, with either two or three games at home and the remainder away. All games in the first half of June are Cup contests. The Cup final, which remains a single game featuring the top teams in each conference's Cup standings, is now held near the end of June or at the start of July. Under both formats, all Cup games except the final count as regular-season games.


=== All-Star Game ===

In 1999, the league held its first All-Star Game, where the best players of the Eastern Conference played against the best players of the Western Conference. The West dominated play until 2006, when the East finally won a game.
In July, the regular season pauses to celebrate the annual WNBA All-Star Game. The game is part of a weekend-long event, held in a selected WNBA city each year. The game is played on the selected WNBA team's home court. Through the 2017 edition, the All-Star Game featured star players from the Western Conference facing star players from the Eastern Conference. Since 2018, conference affiliations have been ignored in team selections. During the season, voting for All-Star starters takes place among fans, WNBA players, and sports media members. The starters are selected by a weighted vote (fans 50%, players and media 25% each), while reserves are selected by the league's head coaches. The two players with the most fan votes are named team captains, who then fill out their teams in a draft format similar to that currently used for the NBA All-Star Game.
In 2004, The Game at Radio City was held in place of a traditional All-Star Game. The 2006 All-Star Game was the first game to feature custom uniforms that match the decade anniversary logo. From 2008 through 2016, no All-Star Game was held in any Summer Olympic year. In 2010, an exhibition game (Stars at the Sun) was held. Although the 2020 Summer Olympics were postponed to 2021 due to COVID-19, no All-Star Game was played in that season. The 2021 season featured the first All-Star Game in an Olympic year since 2000; this contest featured a WNBA all-star team facing the US national team. The 2024 game used the same format as in 2021, and was also an official All-Star Game.
Shortly after the All-Star break is the trading deadline. After this date, teams are not allowed to exchange players with each other for the remainder of the season, although they may still sign and release players. Major trades are often completed right before the trading deadline.


=== Playoffs ===

The WNBA playoffs usually begin in late September, though in years of the FIBA World Cup they begin in August. In the current system, the eight best teams by the regular-season record, without regard to conference alignment, qualify for the playoffs. Since 2022, the playoffs have been held in a standard knockout format, with the quarterfinals consisting of best-of-three series and the semifinals being best-of-five. The Finals were also best-of-five until being expanded to best-of-seven in 2025. Since 2021, Google has been the official sponsor of all playoff rounds except for the Finals, which are sponsored by YouTube TV.
Having a higher seed offers several advantages. The higher seed will generally face a weaker team, and will have home-court advantage in each round. In 2024, all quarterfinal series used a 2–1 home-court pattern, which allowed the higher seed the opportunity to win the series without having to visit the lower seed. This in turn meant that a lower seed that won one of the first two games would host the series decider. However, the quarterfinals returned to an odd-even pattern in 2025, with the higher seed hosting the first game and a potential third game.
The quarterfinals are bracketed in the normal manner for an 8-team tournament, with 1 vs. 8 and 4 vs. 5 on one side of the bracket and 2 vs. 7 and 3 vs. 6 on the other. The winners of each quarterfinal series advance to the semifinals, with the bracket not being reseeded. The semifinals use a 2–2–1 home-court pattern, meaning that the higher-seeded team will have home court in games 1, 2, and 5 while the other team plays at home in game 3 and 4.


=== Finals ===

The final playoff round, a best-of-seven series between the two semifinal winners, is known as the WNBA Finals and is held annually, currently scheduled in October. Each player on the winning team receives a championship ring. Also, the league awards a WNBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award. Since 2025, the Finals have used the same 2–2–1–1–1 pattern currently used by the NBA, meaning that the higher seed hosts games 1 and 2, the lower seed hosts games 3 and 4, and the teams alternate the last three games, all if necessary.


== Players and coaches ==

In 2011, a decade and a half after the launch of the WNBA, only two players remained from the league's inaugural season in 1997: Sheryl Swoopes and Tina Thompson. Lisa Leslie was the longest-tenured player from the 1997 draft class; she spent her entire career (1997–2009) with the Los Angeles Sparks. Sue Bird holds both of the league's most significant longevity records—number of seasons in the league (19) and games played (580).
The members of the WNBA's All-Decade Team were chosen in 2006 on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the WNBA from 30 nominees compiled by fans, media, coach, and player voting. The team was to comprise the 10 best and most influential players of the first decade of the WNBA, with consideration also given to sportsmanship, community service, leadership, and contribution to the growth of women's basketball.

Players for the WNBA's Top 15 Team were chosen in 2011 on the anniversary of the league's fifteenth season from amongst 30 nominees compiled similarly to that of the All-Decade Team process. This process was repeated for the league's 20th anniversary season in 2016 with the selection of the WNBA Top 20@20, and for the 25th anniversary season in 2021 with the selection of The W25.
Over 30 players have scored at least 3,000 points in their WNBA careers. Only 15 WNBA players have reached the 6,000 point milestone: Diana Taurasi, Tina Charles, DeWanna Bonner, Tina Thompson, Tamika Catchings, Nneka Ogwumike, Candice Dupree, Cappie Pondexter, Sue Bird, Candance Parker, Katie Smith, Sylvia Fowles, Lisa Leslie, Seimone Augustus and Lauren Jackson. The scoring average leader is A'ja Wilson of the Las Vegas Aces, with an average of 21.30 points per game.
In 2007, Paul Westhead of the Phoenix Mercury became the first person to earn both NBA and WNBA championship rings as a coach.
In 2008, 50-year-old Nancy Lieberman became the oldest player to play in a WNBA game. She signed a seven-day contract with the Detroit Shock and played one game, tallying two assists and two turnovers in nine minutes of action. By playing in the one game Lieberman broke a record that she had set in 1997 when she was the league's oldest player at 39. The oldest player to have participated in a full season is Diana Taurasi, who turned 42 early in the 2024 season.
Sue Bird, who played for the Seattle Storm from 2002 until her retirement in 2022 (though she missed the 2013 and 2019 seasons to injury), holds the record for career assists with 3,234 in 580 regular-season games. The record for most assists per game is currently held by Courtney Vandersloot, an American who also holds a Hungarian passport and has represented that country internationally. She has averaged 6.62 assists per game during her career with the Chicago Sky (2011–2022, 2025–present) and New York Liberty (2023–2024). Vandersloot also has six of the top ten seasons in assists per game, with 8.1 in 2017 and 2023, 8.6 in 2018 and 2021, 9.1 in 2019, and 10.0 in 2020.


=== Milestones ===


=== Awards ===
Around the beginning of September (or late August in Olympic and FIBA World Cup years), the regular season ends. It is during this time that voting begins for individual awards. The Sixth Player of the Year Award (known before 2021 as the "Sixth Woman" award) is given to the best player coming off the bench (must have more games coming off the bench than actual games started). The Rookie of the Year Award is awarded to the most outstanding first-year player. The Most Improved Player Award is awarded to the player who is deemed to have shown the most improvement from the previous season. The Defensive Player of the Year Award is awarded to the league's best defender. The Kim Perrot Sportsmanship Award is awarded to the player who shows outstanding sportsmanship on and off the court. The Coach of the Year Award is awarded to the coach that has made the most positive difference to a team. The Most Valuable Player Award is given to the player deemed the most valuable for her team that season. The Basketball Executive of the Year Award is presented to the team executive most instrumental in his or her team's success in that season. The newest WNBA award, first presented in 2019, is the season-long version of the WNBA Community Assist Award, presented to a player for especially meritorious community service.
Also named are the All-WNBA Teams, the All-Defensive Teams, and the All-Rookie Team; each consists of five players. There are two All-WNBA teams; starting with the 2022 season, each consists of five top players selected without regard to position, with first-team status being the most desirable. There are two All-Defensive teams; since the 2023 season, each consists of the top defenders regardless of position. Finally, there is one All-Rookie team, consisting of the top five first-year players regardless of position. (In all cases, a tie in voting may lead to a team containing six players instead of five.)


==== Most recent award winners ====
All listed winners are from the 2025 season unless noted otherwise.


=== Retired numbers ===

Notes


=== Notable international players ===

A number of international players that have played in the WNBA have earned multiple all-stars or won MVP awards:

 Janeth Arcain, Brazil  – four-time WNBA champion with the Houston Comets (1997–2000), one-time All-Star (2001) and Most Improved Player Award (2001)
 Elena Baranova, Russia – among the first international players in the WNBA (1997), one-time All-Star (2001).
 Zheng Haixia, China – first winner of the Kim Perrot Sportsmanship Award and first international player to win a WNBA award (1997)
 Margo Dydek, Poland – first international player to be #1 draft pick (1998)
 Ticha Penicheiro, Portugal – WNBA champion with the Sacramento Monarchs (2005) and four-time All-Star
 Lauren Jackson, Australia – two-time WNBA champion with the Seattle Storm (2004, 2010), three-time WNBA MVP and eight-time All-Star
 Penny Taylor, Australia – three-time WNBA champion with the Phoenix Mercury (2007, 2009, 2014) and four-time All-Star
 Tammy Sutton-Brown, Canada – two-time All-Star
 Sophia Young, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines – four-time All-Star
 Sancho Lyttle, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines – two-time All-Star
 Liz Cambage, Australia  – four-time All-Star
 Emma Meesseman, Belgium – WNBA champion with the Washington Mystics (2019), two-time All-Star, 2019 WNBA Finals MVP
 Jonquel Jones, The Bahamas – WNBA champion with the New York Liberty, five-time All-Star, 2017 Most Improved Player, 2018 Sixth Player of the Year, 2021 WNBA MVP, 2023 WNBA Commissioner's Cup MVP, 2024 WNBA Finals MVP
 Satou Sabally, Germany – two time All-Star, 2023 Most Improved Player
Some of these players, among them Jones, Lyttle, Penicheiro, Sabally, Sutton-Brown, and Young played U.S. college basketball.


== Rules and regulations ==
Rules are governed by standard basketball rules as defined by the NBA, with a few notable exceptions:

The three-point line is 22 ft 1.75 in (6.75 m) from the center of the basket, with a distance of 22 ft (6.71 m) at the corners. The main arc is essentially identical to that used by FIBA (effective October 1, 2012, for domestic competitions) and the NCAA (effective in 2019–20 in Division I and 2020–21 in Divisions II and III for men, and in 2021–22 for all women's divisions). The WNBA corner distance, as measured from the center of the basket, is identical to that of the NBA; the FIBA and NCAA distance at the corners is 4 in (10.16 cm) shorter.
The regulation WNBA ball is a minimum 28.5 inches (72 cm) in circumference and weighs 20.0 ounces (570 g), 1 inch (2.5 cm) smaller and 2 ounces (57 g) lighter than the NBA ball.  Since 2004, this size has been used for all senior-level women's competitions throughout the world in full-court basketball. Competitions in the half-court 3x3 variant used the women's ball until 2015, when a dedicated ball with the circumference of the women's ball but the weight of the men's ball was introduced. Wilson became the WNBA ball supplier in 2021. Prior to that year, Spalding had been the ball supplier since 1997.
Quarters are 10 minutes in duration instead of 12.
Games are divided into four 10-minute quarters as opposed to the league's original two 20-minute halves of play, similar to FIBA and NCAA women's college rules.
A recent trend with new WNBA rules has been to match them with a similar NBA rule. Since the 2006 WNBA season:

The winner of the opening jump ball shall begin the 4th quarter with the ball out of bounds. The loser shall begin with the ball out of bounds in the second and third quarters. Previously under the two-half format, both periods started with jump balls, presumably to eliminate the possibility of a team intentionally losing the opening tip to gain the opening possession of the second half. This is not a problem under the four-quarters because the winner of the opening tip gets the opening possession of the final period.
The shot clock was decreased from 30 to 24 seconds, matching the FIBA shot clock. Starting in 2020, the last five seconds of the shot clock counted down in tenths of a second.
The 2007 WNBA season brought changes that included:

The amount of time that a team must move the ball across the half-court line went from 10 to 8 seconds.
A referee can grant time-outs to either a player or the coach.
Two free throws and possession of the ball for a clear-path-to-the-basket foul. Previously only one free throw was awarded as well as possession.
In 2012, the WNBA added the block/charge arc under the basket. As of 2013 the defensive three-second rule and anti-flopping guidelines were introduced. The three-point line was also extended; in 2017, that line extended into the corners to match the NBA's.
Since 2017, Tissot is the official timekeeper for the league, as it uses a unified game clock/shot clock system.


=== Court dimensions ===


== Business ==


=== Finance ===
During the mid-2000s, the NBA spent more than $10 million per year to keep the WNBA financially solvent. In 2007, teams were estimated to be losing $1.5 million to $2 million a year. In total, the league projected losses through the 2010 season to be around $400 million. In December 2010, Donna Orender said that the league had its first-ever "cash flow positive" team during the 2010 season. In 2011, three teams were profitable, and in 2013, six of the league's 12 teams reported a profit. However, in 2018, NBA Commissioner Adam Silver revealed that the WNBA had lost an average of more than $10 million annually, which would amount to at least $280 million in losses since the WNBA's inception in 1997.
By the 2024 season, the WNBA has seen their revenue grow rapidly through a variety of avenues, such as through raising capital, re-negotiating their media rights deal, expansion fees, increased ticket sales, and establishing new strategic partnerships and sponsorships with organizations. Still, 40% of the revenue generated by the WNBA goes to the teams and the players, with the remainder going to the NBA and outside investors. Overall, the league is expected to have lost $50 million for the 2024 season.


=== Activism ===

The New York Times in 2020 called the WNBA "the most socially progressive pro league".
As the popularity of the league has grown, players have gained more voice and power to perform as activists in many fields. One of the activist players' main focuses is the inequality between men's and women's sports. Many players such as Brittney Griner, Breanna Stewart, and Maya Moore have spoken about equality between gender, sexual orientation, and race. The players have also supported progressive social and political movements such as Black Lives Matter and others. The Minnesota Lynx were early advocates. The New York Times called Seimone Augustus "one of sports' most forward-thinking and undersung activists" for her early work advocating for marriage equality and LGBTQ+ rights. Before the Lynx July 9, 2016, home game, the team held a press conference where the four co-captains wore black t-shirts with the message ""Change starts with us - Justice and Accountability" on the front and the names of Philando Castile and Alton Sterling on the back. Castile had been murdered by police in a traffic stop three days before the game. Shortly after the George Floyd protests began, the league and union decided in 2020 to put Black Lives Matter and Say Her Name slogans on warmup gear and opening weekend uniforms. When team owner Senator Kelly Loeffler criticized the league's support for Black Lives Matter, her team wore black T-shirts with the slogan "VOTE WARNOCK", endorsing her election opponent Raphael Warnock, an African-American pastor who defeated Loeffler.

In 2021, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the WNBA led American professional sports teams in promoting the COVID-19 vaccine. Teams hosted vaccine clinics in their home arenas. In April the league and union's Social Justice Council made a PSA, Our Health is Worth a Shot, that aired during the WNBA draft. In June 2021, the WNBA announced that 99% of its players had been fully vaccinated.
In June 2024, the documentary film Power of the Dream will be released. The film focuses on the league's work to support Black Lives Matter and the organizing to support the election of Raphael Warnock. Sue Bird and Nneka Ogwumike are co-producers of the film along with Tracee Ellis Ross and the director Dawn Porter.


=== Sponsorships ===
On June 1, 2009, the Phoenix Mercury was the first team in WNBA history to announce a marquee sponsorship. The team secured a partnership with LifeLock to brand their jerseys and warm-ups. It was the first branded jersey in WNBA history. Following the expiration of the LifeLock deal, the Mercury secured a new uniform sponsorship deal with Casino Arizona and Talking Stick Resort on February 3, 2014.
Other teams eventually followed in the Mercury's footsteps; some teams feature sponsors prominently on the front of their jerseys, while others have sponsors on the upper left-hand shoulder.
On August 22, 2011, the WNBA announced a league-wide marquee sponsorship with Boost Mobile. The deal would allow the Boost Mobile logo to be placed on eleven of the 12 teams' jerseys (excluding San Antonio) in addition to branding on the courts and in arenas. A source said the deal is a "multiyear, eight-figure deal".
Before the start of the 2011 season, every team announced a new look for their uniforms. The supplier of the uniforms for the league, Adidas, upgraded all teams to new high-tech designs, much like they did for the NBA before the start of their season.
On April 8, 2019, the WNBA announced a multiyear marquee partnership with AT&T, making them the first non-apparel partner to have its logo featured on the front of all 12 team jerseys. The jerseys officially debuted during the 2019 WNBA draft.
In 2020, the league launched WNBA Changemakers, a collective of businesses committed to the advancement of women in sports. The business partners that make up the collective provide direct financial investment to the WNBA as well as marketing amplification through collaborations.


=== Salaries, rosters, and collective bargaining ===
Before the 2009 season, the maximum team roster size was changed from 13 players (11 active and 2 inactive) to 11 players (all active). Any team that falls below nine players able to play due to injury or any other factor outside of the control of the team will, upon request, be granted a roster hardship exception allowing the team to sign an additional player or players so that the team will have nine players able to play in an upcoming game or games. As soon as the injured (or otherwise sidelined) player(s) can play, the roster hardship player(s)—not any other player on the roster—must be waived. In March 2014, the WNBA and players signed a new, eight-year collective bargaining agreement, increasing the number of players on a roster to 12.
The WNBA draft is held annually every spring. The minimum age is 22 years for American players and 20 years for international players, measured as of December 31 of the calendar year of the draft. For draft purposes, "American" includes those born in the U.S., as well as those who have enrolled in a U.S. college or university, regardless of their citizenship. The draft is three rounds long, with each of the 12 teams in the league (trades aside) getting three picks each. The draft order for the eight teams that made the playoffs the previous year are based on team records, and the team with the highest previous record will pick last. For the remaining top four picks, a selection process similar to the NBA draft lottery is conducted for the four teams that did not qualify for the playoffs.
Previously, in 2008, a new six-year collective bargaining agreement was agreed upon between the players and the league. The salary cap for an entire team in 2010 was $827,000 (although it was later lowered to $775,000). By 2013 (the sixth year under this agreement), the cap for an entire team was $900,000. In 2010, the minimum salary for a player with three-plus years of experience was $51,000 while the maximum salary for a six-plus year player was $101,500 (the first time in league history that players can receive over $100,000). The minimum salary for rookies was $35,190. Many WNBA players supplement their salaries by playing in European, Australian, or more recently Chinese women's basketball leagues during the WNBA offseason. The WNBA pays its female players less than their NBA counterparts, although this is attributed to the much greater revenues of the NBA; however the WNBA has been criticized for "paying its players a lower share of revenue than the NBA".
The decision of superstar Diana Taurasi to sit out the 2015 WNBA season was seen by some in the media as a harbinger of salary-related troubles in the future. The Russian club for which she was playing at the time, UMMC Ekaterinburg, offered her a bonus well over the league's maximum player salary to sit out that season. Taurasi accepted, largely because she had not had an offseason since playing college basketball more than a decade earlier. Such offers have often been made to star American players, including Taurasi herself, but none were accepted until Taurasi did so in 2015.

A more recent incident that led to widespread media comment on the WNBA's salary structure was the torn Achilles suffered by reigning WNBA MVP Breanna Stewart while playing for another Russian side, Dynamo Kursk, in the 2019 EuroLeague Women final. The injury came at a time when the WNBA and its players' union were preparing to negotiate a new collective bargaining agreement, following the union's announcement in November 2018 that it would opt out of the current CBA after the 2019 season. With overseas leagues offering much higher salaries to many players than the WNBA currently provides, roughly 70% of the league's players go overseas in any given season. While these players do not necessarily play as many games as NBA players do in their seasons, even participants in the NBA Finals get several months of rest in the offseason, something not available for WNBA players who also play overseas. In a story on the ramifications of Stewart's injury, Michael Voepel of ESPN had this to say about the lead-in to the injury:For Stewart, her 2018 went like this: playing in China, brief time off, WNBA season, World Cup in the Canary Islands, brief time off, playing in Russia. She hasn't had significant recovery time since before her senior season at UConn. Now, she'll have time away from playing but while going through rehab and physical therapy.
The current CBA, which took effect in 2020, significantly increased minimum and maximum salaries. The minimum league salary in 2020 was $57,000 for players with less than three years of experience, and $68,000 otherwise. For most players, the 2020 maximum salary was $185,000; players who met specified criteria for league service had a maximum of $215,000.
WNBA players are awarded bonuses for certain achievements. Some of the bonuses given by the league (amount is per player), from 2020 to 2027 (the duration of the current CBA):
WNBA champion: $11,356; Runner-up: $5,678; Most Valuable Player: $15,450; All-WNBA First Team member: $10,300; and All-Star Game participant: $2,575. These were only modest increases from amounts provided before 2020.
In recent years, the lack of roster space for rookies, thus hampering their professional development, has become a major issue. While the 2020 CBA led to maximum player salaries nearly doubling from 2019 to 2022, the team cap only increased by slightly less than 40% in that period. Because the cap is a hard cap, many WNBA teams now carry only 11 players on their rosters instead of the maximum 12, leading Stewart to state "We're at a tipping point. . . . without some easy tweaks, we are no longer a league that has 12 teams and 144 players — it's more like 133." The WNBA also has no developmental league similar to the NBA G League; Chiney Ogwumike, a vice president of the players' union, publicly called for such a league. While roster limits have always been a significant issue in the league—between the first WNBA draft in 1997 and 2021, more than 40% of drafted players never made a roster—this became especially apparent at the dawn of the 2020s. In one notable example, the 2019 Naismith Trophy winner Megan Gustafson did not make an opening-day roster in 2019, and had only played in parts of the 2019–2021 seasons before being cut in the 2022 preseason. This issue gained major publicity during the week before the start of the 2022 season. The Minnesota Lynx, which began that week with barely over $12,000 of cap room, cut six players, including the 2020 Rookie of the Year Crystal Dangerfield, their 2021 first-round pick Rennia Davis, and both of their 2022 draft picks. The Seattle Storm, whose first 2022 draft pick was in the middle of the second round, waived that pick (Elissa Cunane), and the Las Vegas Aces waived both of their picks, one of them a first-rounder.
Another clause in the 2020 CBA, known as the "prioritization" clause, has been viewed as a potential problem for the league. Because of overseas league commitments, a significant number of WNBA players have reported late to training camp each season. Several overseas leagues and continental club competitions overlap with WNBA training camps, and even with the start of the WNBA season. For example, 55 WNBA players missed the start of training camp in 2021, meaning that most teams were unable to start practice with their full rosters. Starting in 2023, teams are required to fine players with more than two years of WNBA experience who miss the start of training camp. (Exemptions are provided for national team commitments, graduations, and other significant life events.) Starting in 2024, the league can penalize a veteran player who does not report to camp with a season-long suspension without pay. In a 2021 episode of a podcast hosted by Napheesa Collier and A'ja Wilson, Collier raised the prospect of players choosing to abandon the WNBA for higher overseas salaries, telling Wilson "If I'm not making that much in the league, if it's not enough for me to survive on during the year, I'm going overseas and having the summer off."  When Stewart re-signed with the Seattle Storm as a free agent before the 2022 season, she cited the prioritization clause as the reason she only signed a one-year contract.


==== Player revenue ====
There are many factors that play into the smaller wages WNBA players receive during their season, but two major contributors are revenue and viewership numbers and the allocation of funds by both the NBA and the WNBA. It is estimated that wages for NBA players take up 50% of the league's annual revenue, while WNBA players only receive 20% of their league's income. Kelsey Plum said in an interview with The Residency Podcast, "We're not asking to get paid what the men get paid. We're asking to get paid the same percentage of revenue shared."


==== Viewership ====
In sports, revenue and viewership are indicators of how much money the sport is generating. It can be brought in through sales such as tickets and merchandise, as well as how many spectators are broadcasting the game. The salary of players and the finances that go into maintaining the sport depend on viewership. Without revenue and viewership, it is difficult to uphold and maintain sporting facilities and equipment. In 2019, it was reported that the total revenue the WNBA brought in was $102 million. New data shows that in 2023, the league and teams together are estimated to bring in around $180 million to $200 million in revenue.
The WNBA's audience has increased by 67% halfway through the 2023 season, with an average of 556,184 viewers per game. Their social media presence has also risen in popularity, garnering more than 24 million views across all social media platforms. With increased media attention on women's basketball, Commissioner Cathy Engelbert announced in May 2024 that the league would allocate $50 million over two years to fund charter flights for players.


==== Player marketing agreements ====

Player marketing agreements are contracts that allow WNBA players to bring in more individual revenue by promoting the WNBA year-round. As of 2022, there are 10 players who have signed PMAs: Diamond DeShields, Dearica Hamby, Napheesa Collier, DiDi Richards, Arike Ogunbowale, Kahleah Copper, Ariel Atkins, Jasmine Thomas, Kelsey Mitchell, and Izzy Harrison. The league is expected to spend $1 million on PMAs annually, and this funding is divided between the players who have signed contracts, with a salary cap of $250,000. While this is a way for players to make more money during their off-season, it is also a way for the league to keep players from going overseas, as they become tied to the WNBA and are unable to play in leagues in Europe and elsewhere. Players choose to sign PMAs for many different reasons, ranging anywhere from injuries sustained in-season that need to be rested to childcare responsibilities. These agreements are still in their infancy stage and need further developing and funding to become a viable option for more WNBA players who are looking to increase their revenue.


==== NBA support ====
The WNBA is half-owned by the NBA and receives between $10–$15 million annually to subsidize the league from the NBA's yearly revenue, which in 2022, reached up to $10 billion. Six WNBA teams are considered sister teams to the NBA teams based in the same areas and are directly connected to those NBA teams and their markets. The NBA's allotment of funding to all WNBA teams, not just sister teams, has been discussed in many academic and sports analysis circles, with some authors arguing that the NBA should be doing more to support the WNBA if they want the league to succeed. Sponsorship and television deals continue to be an area where the WNBA creates less revenue than their NBA counterparts, with the WNBA bringing in $25 million from ESPN and the NBA bringing in $930 million from ESPN and TNT. Some argue that the NBA could be working harder to bridge that gap between organizations and either share more revenue from deals or help the WNBA create their own more profitable agreements.
In July 2024, the WNBA negotiated a new media rights deal as part of a total package with the NBA valued at $77 billion. Prior to re-negotiating their deal, the WNBA media rights were only valued at $60 million a year. Under the new deal, the WNBA can expect to earn $200 million a year for the next eleven years, more than a 300% increase over previous years, but because the media deal lumps the NBA together with the WNBA, the true valuation of the WNBA media rights remains unknown.


=== Merchandise ===


==== 2021 ====
The following shows the top merchandise sales during the 2021 season, based on sales through the WNBA's official online store.
However, a story by NBC Sports journalist Alex Azzi argued that the WNBA's merchandise rankings were misleading for multiple reasons.

At any given time, the WNBA has at most 144 players, but at the time of the story, "ready to ship" replica team jerseys were available for fewer than 20 of them. Many of the league's top players in the 2021 season were not among those with "ready to ship" jerseys. The only such jersey available for Jonquel Jones, who would be named league MVP shortly after the story ran, was a replica of the jersey she wore in that season's All-Star Game, and not her Connecticut Sun jersey. The league's leading scorer that season, Tina Charles, had no ready-made jersey available for sale. Also, not all of the ready-made jerseys were available in youth sizes. All other player replica jerseys must be custom-ordered, which take longer to ship, cost more, and are only available in adult sizes. The only Minnesota Lynx player with a ready-made jersey, Maya Moore, had not played in the league since 2018 (and would formally announce her retirement in 2023).
Some teams, among them the Lynx, offer a larger variety of ready-made replica jerseys in their online team stores. Also, Dick's Sporting Goods, which had entered into a multi-year marketing agreement with the league shortly before the story ran, has a wider availability of such jerseys than the WNBA online store. However, the league's official merchandise rankings do not include sales through any outlets other than its online store.
While over 80% of WNBA players are black, the top three on this list, as well as four of the top five, are white. A study by two researchers at the University of Massachusetts published earlier in 2021 concluded that after controlling for points and rebounds, white players individually averaged twice as much media mentions as black players during the 2020 season. This discrepancy was specifically called out by white UConn superstar Paige Bueckers during her acceptance speech at the 2021 ESPY Awards, and Azzi argued that it contributed to the perceived racial bias in the WNBA merchandise rankings.


==== 2024 ====
The arrival of Caitlin Clark in 2024 led to unprecedented public interest in the WNBA, and subsequently the league's merchandise was being sold in record numbers, both player-specific and league-wide, such as the orange WNBA hoodie. Clark had the most jerseys sold during the year's first half, with the rankings also featuring two other rookies in Angel Reese and Kate Martin.


==== 2025 ====
In the first half of 2025, the best-selling jerseys were as shown below.


=== Presidents and commissioners ===
The title of the league's chief executive was "President" before Cathy Engelbert became the first "Commissioner".

Val Ackerman, 1996–2005
Donna Orender, 2005–2010
Chris Granger, 2011 (interim)
Laurel J. Richie, 2011–2015
Lisa Borders, 2015–2018
Mark Tatum, 2018–2019 (interim)
Cathy Engelbert, 2019–present


== Attendance ==

In the inaugural 1997 WNBA season, average attendance for the regular season was 9,661 attendants with 112 games played. Average attendance increased by 12% the following year in 1998 over 150 games. By 2000, the regular WNBA season consisted of 256 games and attendance dropped with an average of 9,142 attendants per game for season 2000-2003. Beginning in 2003, attendance dropped at a rate of approximately 5% year-over-year until 2006 when average attendance was 7,479. From 2007 to 2014, attendance numbers remained relatively steady with a low of 7,457 in 2012 and a high of 8,039 in 2009.
In 2015, the WNBA's attendance per game decreased by 3.4% to 7,318. This was a record low for the WNBA since it was established in 1997. The relocation of the San Antonio Stars to Freeman Coliseum and the Tulsa Shock to Arlington likely contributed to particularly large drops in attendance in 2015 (−37.4% and −7.2% respectively). With record low attendance, the WNBA sought to improve their branding effort for the following 20th anniversary season and the WNBA President, Laurel J. Richie, discussed creating an expansion committee to evaluate if and how the WNBA should go about expanding their reach.
Attendance in 2016 and 2017 recovered slightly with average attendance at 7,655 and 7,716 respectively, but the 2018 and 2019 seasons each set the lowest average attendance in WNBA history (6,769 and 6,535 respectively). However, about half of the decline in attendance from 2017 to 2018 was due to the New York Liberty moving from 19,812-seat Madison Square Garden to the 5,000-seat Westchester County Center. While the Liberty had averaged over 9,000 fans in 2017, James Dolan, then the team's owner, noted that roughly half of the team's attendance in that season came from complimentary tickets. Similarly in 2019, the Washington Mystics moved from the 20,356-seat Capital One Arena to the 4,111-seat Entertainment and Sports Arena. The Las Vegas Aces and New York Liberty each saw double-digit percentage losses in 2019, but half of the league's teams saw attendance increases in that season, and the number of sellouts was the same in both seasons (41).
With plans to expand the number of games played by each team from 34 to 36 regular season games, and with the introduction of the mid-season Commissioner's Cup tournament to be broadcast on ESPN and ABC, the league had high hopes for the 2020 WNBA season, but that was derailed when the season was postponed indefinitely due to the COVID-19 pandemic on April 3. Instead, the league held an abbreviated 22-game regular season at IMG Academy in Bradenton, Florida, with no fans in attendance. The 2021 WNBA season was also shortened to a 32-game regular season and attendance numbers remained low with an average of 2,620 people in attendance per game, likely due to persistent fears around the COVID-19 virus and new protocols put in place for large indoor venues. By 2022, average attendance had rebounded to 5,646 and in 2023 attendance had recovered to pre-pandemic numbers with 6,615 average attendance per game.
2024 turned out to be a breakout season for WNBA attendance, with an average of 9,807 fans per game and an increase of 48% over the 2023 season. Three games drew more than 20,000 fans during the 2024 season, including a record-breaking attendance of 20,711 fans when the Indiana Fever visited the Washington Mystics on September 19. A surge in interest in women's college basketball preceded the 2024 WNBA season, with viewership of the 2024 women's NCAA championship game up over 90% from the previous season and marking the first time in NCAA history where viewership for the women's championship game exceeded the men's. Sports analysts cite intense interest in the incoming 2024 rookie class, led by number one draft pick Caitlin Clark, as the reason for the dramatic increases in attendance, dubbing her ability to drive up ticket sales "Clarkonomics".


== Media coverage ==

Currently, WNBA games are televised throughout the U.S. by ABC, ESPN, ESPN2, and Ion Television.
In the early years, two women-oriented networks, Lifetime and Oxygen, also broadcast games, including the first game of the WNBA. NBC showed games from 1997 to 2002 as part of their NBA on NBC coverage before the league transferred the rights to ABC/ESPN.
In June 2007, the WNBA signed a contract extension with ESPN, the first agreement to pay television rights fees to a women's professional league. The new television deal runs from 2009 to 2016. A minimum of 18 games will be broadcast on ABC, ESPN, and ESPN2 each season; the rights to broadcast the first regular-season game and the All-Star game are held by ABC. Additionally, a minimum of 11 postseason games will be broadcast on any of the three networks. Along with this deal, came the first-ever rights fees to be paid to a women's professional sports league. Over the eight years of the contract, "millions and millions of dollars" will be "dispersed to the league's teams".
In 2013, the WNBA and ESPN signed a six-year extension on the broadcast deal to cover 2017–2022. In the new deal, a total of 30 games would be shown each season on ESPN networks. Each team would receive around $1 million per year.
On April 22, 2019, CBS Sports Network reached a multi-year deal to televise 40 regular-season weekend and primetime WNBA games, beginning in the 2019 season.
On April 20, 2023, Ion Television signed a multi-year deal with the WNBA to air a 15-week slate of doubleheader games on Friday nights (branded as WNBA Friday Night Spotlight on ION), beginning with that year's regular season. It will be the first national sports broadcast carried by Ion since 2011, and marks the first ever television contract for Scripps Sports, which was founded by the E. W. Scripps Company in December 2022 to acquire sports events for Ion and the group's local television stations. The agreement also grants local rights to selected Ion O&Os for games involving regional WNBA teams, which stations may carry in early- or late-evening broadcast windows depending on tip-off time. The first broadcast was on May 26, 2023, when the Washington Mystics visited the Chicago Sky. On June 13, 2025, the WNBA announced that they have extended their agreement with Scripps Sports to continue their Friday Night Showcase package of games on Ion Television. On September 30, 2025, the WNBA announced that it has also entered an 11-year agreement with Versant, the cable spin-off company of NBCUniversal owned by Comcast shareholders, where its games will air on USA Network.
Starting in 2026, the WNBA will begin a new 11-year agreement that will see games return to NBC Sports, with new airings on USA Sports, as well as remaining on ESPN/ABC and Amazon Prime Video. With this new deal, the league will distribute more than 125 games nationally (a minimum of 25 across ESPN/ABC, 50 across NBC platforms, and 30 on Prime Video) and worldwide. ESPN continues on as the league's All-Star and Draft broadcaster, Prime Video continues as the broadcaster for the league's Commissioner's Cup games, and NBC will pick up rights to all USA Basketball games. In addition, the WNBA Playoffs and Finals will see a wider distribution across the three partners, where each partner airs a first round series annually (two on ESPN/ABC and one each on NBC platforms and Prime Video), and rotates turns airing the semifinals and Finals (eight semifinals and five Finals on ESPN/ABC and seven semifinals and three Finals on NBC platforms and Prime Video). The WNBA also stated that they are expected to add additional media partners prior to the first year of the new deal.
Some teams offer games on local radio, while all teams have some games broadcast on local television stations:


=== WNBA League Pass ===
In 2009, the WNBA announced the launch of WNBA LiveAccess, a feature on WNBA.com that provides fans with access to more than 200 live game webcasts throughout the WNBA season. All of the WNBA LiveAccess games are then archived for on-demand viewing. Most games (except broadcasts on ABC, ESPN or ESPN2, which are available on ESPN3) are available via this system. The first use of LiveAccess was the E League versus Chicago Sky preseason game.
Before the 2011 season, LiveAccess was given an overhaul, and the system became more reliable and many new features were added. Before the 2012 season, it was announced that users of LiveAccess would have to pay a $4.99 subscription fee to use the service. In 2013, this was increased to $14.99. In 2014 the streaming service was renamed WNBA League Pass.
WNBA League Pass is available as part of the WNBA App, the free mobile application available on the iPhone, iPad and Android devices and costs US$16.99 for the season. Games airing on ESPN, ESPN2 as well as other games taking place during the telecast windows of ESPN and ESPN2 games, are not available live on WNBA League Pass. However, those games will be available on-demand shortly after the conclusion of their live broadcast.


=== Viewership ===

On the 2008 season opening day (May 17), ABC broadcast the Los Angeles Sparks and Phoenix Mercury matchup to showcase new rookie sensation Candace Parker. The game received a little over 1 million viewers. In 2008, WNBA games averaged just 413,000 viewers, compared to 1.46 million viewers on ESPN and over 2.2 million on ABC for NBA games. In addition, WNBA games have much poorer visibility, attendance, and ratings than NCAA games.
In 2011, the regular-season broadcast drew 270,000 viewers, an increase of 5% over the 2010 season. As sponsorships continued to grow with deals from ESPN to air WNBA games on ESPN and ESPN2. The league did experience some success on the digital forefront. In 2015, WNBA.com saw a 26% increase in mobile page views, along with a major increase in its social media space; WNBA Instagram grew by 51% that year.
ESPN viewership grew 35% in 2018 over 2017. This became the impetus for the multi-year partnership in which CBS Sports Network would broadcast live WNBA games beginning with the 2019 season. The 2023 season broke viewership and attendance records. Viewership was up 21% compared to the 2022 season within the four national televised networks. (ABC, ESPN, CBS & ESPN2) Attendance was up 16% compared to the previous season and the average game attendance per fan was 6,615 which is the highest since 2018.
The 2024 WNBA regular season set an all-time record with more than 54 million unique viewers and a record 22 games that garnered more than one million viewers each. With an 170% increase in viewership over the 2023 season, the 2024 regular season was the most-viewed season ever across ESPN platforms with an average of 1.19 million viewers per game.


== All-time franchise history (through 2025) ==

1  The Connecticut Sun were known as the Orlando Miracle from 1999–2002.
2  The Dallas Wings were known as the Detroit Shock from 1998–2009 and the Tulsa Shock from 2010–2015.
3  The Las Vegas Aces were known as the Utah Starzz from 1997–2002, the San Antonio Silver Stars from 2003–2013, and the San Antonio Stars from 2014–2017.


== Offseason ==
In July 2023, Napheesa Collier and Breanna Stewart announced Unrivaled, a women's professional three-on-three basketball league. The league was founded, in part, to allow WNBA players to play domestically and to bypass complications from the WNBA's prioritization rule for players who choose to play overseas in the WNBA offseason. Unrivaled's inaugural season, consisting of six teams of six players debuted in January 2025 in the Miami-area community of Medley, Florida.


== See also ==


== References ==


=== Citations ===


=== General references ===
Heath, Thomas (July 12, 2006). "A Matter of Value". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 12, 2006.
"Minimum NBA Salary". Inside Hoops. August 10, 2005. Retrieved September 4, 2006.
"Hoops Happening: Today in women's basketball". Tamryn Spruill. May 1, 2018. Retrieved September 15, 2018.


== Further reading ==
Vorkunov, Mike; Pickman, Ben (October 15, 2024). "How the WNBA went from an 'existential' moment to record success". The Athletic. Retrieved October 16, 2024.


== External links ==
Official website 
WNBA statistics at Basketball-Reference.com