Ainak Wala Jin (Urdu: عینک والا جن, English: Spectacled Genie) is a Pakistani children's television series produced and broadcast by PTV Lahore from 1993 to 1996 and again from 2005 to 2008.
This drama was rebroadcast two times on television in Pakistan due to public demand. It was widely popular among children for its humour and fictional storyline. The first episode of this drama was aired on April 25, 1993. The first season consists of 152 episodes. The first season ended on July 4, 1996. While  Ainak Wala Jin 2 went on air on  March 27, 2005. It consisted of 90 episodes, and the last episode went on air on july 29, 2008.


== Plot ==
The theme was conceived by Hafeez Tahir. He starts living with humans, and the interesting interaction starts. He meets magicians, witches, other genies, space people, and real-life characters. These interactions gave birth to a very interesting story line that entailed comedy, magic, morals, and learning for children and adults.


== Cast ==


=== Season 1 ===
The main actors of this drama are:

Shehzad Qaiser as Nastoor (Ainak Wala Jin).
Sehrish Khan as Mother (Baji Farkhanda)
Nabeel Ahmad Goheer as Daddy
Munna Lahori as Zakoota Jin
Ghayyur Akhtar as Samari Jadugar
Ajlal Asim Bukhari as Imran
Moattar Asim Bukhari (now Moattar Adeel) as Moattar
Zahid Sharif as Jin
Nusrat Ara as Bil Batori
Farooq Butt as Space Chief
Aneel Chaudhri as Ashkali
Fariha Pervez as Aini
Humera Arshad as Toofani Nagan
Shabnam Majeed as Baaji
Haseeb Pasha as Hamoon Jadoogar
Asad Bhandara as Charlie Mamu
Mukhtar Ahmad Shaad as Rehmu Baba
Nisar Butt as Umro Ayyar
Humza Ghayyur Akhtar as Dubi
Hamza Bin Tahir as son of Nastoor
Jameel Fakhri as Shah Taloos
Albela as Taya Abba
Honey Albela as Junior Taya Abba
Umar Daraz Khalil as Aamlee Jadugar
Rashid Mehmood as Sarkata Insaan
Najma as Karnani Churail
Babu Baral as (guest appearance) Jin
Jamal Pasha as Chotta Jin
Naeem Akhtar as Yamag (Pirate)
Abida Beg as Anqa Jadogarni
Farooq Zamir Ghory as Grandfather
Humayon Rasheed as Shahenshah e Jinnat
Tina Aftab as Auntie
Amjad Zaidi as Mr. Z
Aziz Khan as Mr. Y
Waheed Majeed as Space Scientist
Poonam Kashif as Moattar's friend
Asim Bokhari as Buzurg
Bilal Bokhari as Student Jin
Reema Syed, daughter of Taya Abba
Zeba Shehnaz as Jadogarni
Tahira as Goshi
Imran Akbar as Parizaad


=== Season 2 ===
The main actors of this drama are:

Raza Qazi as Ibn e Nastoor (Ainak Wala Jin)
Munna Lahori as Zakoota Jin
Haseeb Pasha as Hamoon Jadoogar
Nusrat Ara as Bill Batori
Najma Begum as Karnani Churail
Ghayur Akhtar as Samri Jadoogar
Mukhtar Ahmad Shaad as Rehmu Baba
Asad Bhandara as Charli Mamu
Ramia as Mother
Haider Sultan as Father
Mannan as Mannan (Son)
Yusra as Yusra (Daughter)
Inshra Raja as Gulab Pari
Asghar chaudhry as Kala Deo
Samina Khalid as Rabata Jadoogarni
Shahid Chaudhry as Tagout
Abbas Bajwa as Raphrhi Jadoogar
Atif Malik as Afrasyaab
Humayun Rasheed as Shahenshah e Jinnat
Sobia as Malaka e Koh Qaf
Amir Wazir as Wazir e Jinnat
Megha as Jadugarni

Note: It should be mentioned here that four famous female singers of Pakistan started their career as actresses with this TV serial. They are Shabnam Majeed, Fariha Pervez, and Humera Arshad. While Hina Nasrullah also acted in Ainak Wala Jin 2.


== Production ==


=== Story ===
The serial was written by Abdul Hameed, who is popularly known as A Hameed. He has written about two hundred books, innumerable columns, memoirs, novels, fiction for children, and many serials for  Pakistani television. His TV serials included Dachi, Alif Liala (many episodes), Ambar Naag Maria, and AINAK WALA JIN. The last one surpassed his other works in popularity.


=== Direction ===
This TV serial was directed by Hafeez Tahir, a versatile director of Pakistan Television. He was given the producer of the decade award for this production by PTV. Having two master's degrees from the  University of Punjab, he was trained in television production and direction at MMTC Indonesia and PTV Academy. He is a poet, short story writer, newspaper columnist and  still photographer. He has three publications to his credit: "Aathwan Rang," "Zere Zamin", and his latest to date, "Manzil Manzil"


=== Special effects ===
In the absence of computer graphics facilities, the director of the show, Hafeez Tahir, managed to create many special effects with the simple chroma key technique. Some ingenious techniques were invented to make those effects with the help of able lighting cameramen and their technical crew. Many layers were created and matted to create imaginative video effects.


== Popularity ==
This play has been immensely popular among children and adults at the same time. The children, their parents, and their elders enjoyed it together. The characters became household names, and some of the dialogues were transformed into political connotations. The team of the play had been invited by many educational institutions and dignitaries, like the Governor of Punjab, Pakistan, Khalid Maqbool, to request a live performance for them.
The team was also invited by Imran Khan, the Pakistani cricketer turned politician, to raise funds for his Shaukat Khanum Memorial Cancer Hospital & Research Centre and, in this connection, the entire play team, along with the play director Hafeez Tahir, had the honour of performing before Princess Diana, Princess of Wales and Imran Khan in 1996.
The team, including Hamoon Jadugar, Zakoota Jin, Bill Batori, Hafeez Tahir, and some other actors, visited 2005 Kashmir earthquake - affected areas with the President of Pakistan to bring back smiles on the faces of mentally stressed children. The team visited the areas on a special helicopter. The play team also performed a magical comedy skit on the Eid Night live transmission from there.
The play has also been presented on stage at the Alhamra Arts Council, Lahore, Pakistan.


== Sequel ==
The play was returned with a sequel, 'Ainak Wala Jin 2'.


== See also ==
Pakistan Television Corporation
List of television programmes broadcast by PTV


== References ==