Ashiq Hussain Qureshi (28 November 1949 – 31 October 2019), was a popular Pakistani cricket administrator, former Captain in the Pakistan Army, First-class cricketer, former First Secretary in the Foreign Service of Pakistan, philanthropist, and Pir. He left the foreign service to set out on his journey of philanthropy returning to Pakistan. He set up a factory of Pepsi Cola and formed The Pepsi Cola Lahore Club cricket team, which emerged victorious in 14 out of 18 national club cricket tournaments spanning the 1980s to the 1990s. 
In 1983, he joined the Lahore based P&T Gymkhana later becoming its chairman. Under him, the club produced four international umpires including Aleem Dar and first-class cricketer Abdul Razzaq. Ashiq encouraged the youth and veterans to play sports and was known for being a close friend of Imran Khan. Additionally for his contributions and efforts to help Imran Khan with forming the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf, Imran Khan Foundation, Namal Institute, and being the first to support Imran Khan on building Shaukat Khanum Memorial Cancer Hospital and Research Centre, serving as a member of the hospitals Board of Governors since its inception until his death, and establishing Pakistan Veterans Cricket Association across Pakistan becoming its Vice President and later Chief Executive Officer. Ashiq is further known for being the first to hug Imran Khan after Pakistan won the 1992 Cricket World Cup. Ashiqs nephew writes that Ashiqs home was littered with trophies from across the country to the extent that his aunt Farzana used some as flower pots.
His name is commemorated in a cricket championship known as the Bahawalpur Division Nawab Ashiq Hussain Qureshi Inter District CCA Challenge Trophy 2021-22. On 21 September 2022, the Pakistan Cricket Board in collaboration with the Southern Punjab cricket team (Pakistan) unveiled the Nawab Ashiq Hussain Trophy 2021-22.


== Early life and education ==
Qureshi was born on 28 November 1949 to his father Sadiq Hussain Qureshi and mother Begum Haseen Bano Qureshi, a landed gentry family. His mother's side belongs to the Pataudi family. His maternal grand mother Begum Abida Sultana was the sister of Nawab Iftikhar Ali Khan Pataudi. His mother was the daughter of Nawab Liaqat Hayat Khan of Wah.  His father Sadiq Hussain Qureshi named him after his father Unionist Party (Punjab) President Nawab Major Ashiq Hussain Qureshi. His cousin Shah Mahmood Qureshi is the former Foreign Minister of Pakistan. Ashiq was one of the three sons of Sadiq Hussain Qureshi. He was educated at La Salle Higher Secondary School, Multan and Aitchison College where he was a classmate of Imran Khan. He was interested in cricket from an early age and was a member of Pakistan Under-19 cricket team.


== Personal life ==
Ashiq and his wife Farzana have four daughters Mahnaz, Mehreen, Sadaf, and Nida.


== Military career ==

Ashiq was commissioned into the 5th Horse (Probyn's Horse) of the Pakistan Army after graduating from the 45th course of the Pakistan Military Academy in August 1971.


== Diplomatic career ==
Ashiq retired as a Captain in the Pakistan Army, opting for a career in the Foreign Service of Pakistan as a diplomat. Ashiq relinquished charge of the role of second secretary junior grade at the Pakistani embassy in London on 3 February 1978. Following his resignation, he took 26 days of earned leave, beginning on 6 February 1978. Permission was granted for him to include weekends in his leave, specifically on February 4-5 and March 4-5, 1978.
Following his return to Pakistan in 1978, he focused on utilizing cricket for societal transformation, establishing the P&T Gymkhana cricket club in Lahore. Under him, the club produced four international umpires including Aleem Dar and first-class cricketer Abdul Razzaq.
For a decade, Ashiq held the position of France's Honorary consul general in Lahore for which he received the French honor Ordre national du Mérite in 2018.


== Cricket career ==
Ashiq was a national U-19 cricketer and met Imran Khan when they were both studying at Aitchison College. They were then selected for the Combined Lahore and Multan Schools team at Sahiwal against the touring team of Middlesex and Surrey schools.
Ashiq made his first-class cricket debut with Pakistan Railways against United Bank Limited in the Quaid-e-Azam Trophy match held from 11-14 May 1984. He batted 5 not out in the second innings of Pakistan Railways and dismissed Mansoor Akhtar with an lbw in the second innings of UBL.
Ashiq played in the National T20 Veterans cricket cup for the Lahore Lions against Islamabad Panthers in 2009 where he won the toss as skipper.
Beyond cricket, Qureshi was an athlete, holding multiple records at various levels. He was also an active philanthropist, contributing significantly to the establishment and functioning of Imran Khan's Shaukat Khanum Hospital, and heading Imran Khan Foundation which set up a college working with the University of Bradford to sponsor underprivileged students and providing relief to thousands affected by disasters across the country since 2000.
In his later years, Qureshi played a pivotal role in the establishment of veterans cricket in Pakistan, leading the over 50's side to the World Cup final. He is also remembered for his iconic photograph being the first to greet captain Imran Khan after Pakistan's 1992 Cricket World Cup victory in Melbourne.


== Cricket executive ==
Ashiq briefly worked in the Pakistan Cricket Board as the Director Grass Root Cricket Development in 1999.
Ashiq was Vice President of the Pakistan Veterans Cricket Association in 2001 becoming its Chief Executive Officer on 22 September 2006 until his death.
Ashiq was the manager of the Pakistan Super Veterans (Over 60) cricket team touring England in June 2019.
Five days before his death, he attended the inauguration of the FBR-Railways Veterans Cricket Championship at Railway Stadium.


== Death, reactions and funeral ==
At ten o'clock in the evening on 31 October 2019, Ashiq was rushed to the hospital after he felt pain in his chest and passed away on the way there. Ashiq's funeral was held at the race course park of Lahore which was attended by his family including his cousin Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, government officials, and Chairman Pakistan Cricket Board Ehsan Mani.
Ashiqs body was flown to Multan where he was buried at the premises of the Shrine of Bahauddin Zakariya.
Prime Minister Imran Khan offered condolences to the family of Ashiq, "devastated by the death of one of my oldest friends Ashiq Qureshi last night. He was always there during my many setbacks in life. Was the first to stand by me when I decided to build SKMT & was a PTI founder member. Above all, he will be missed as a gentleman & great human being".
Aitchison College Principal Michael Thomson released a letter to the media, "Our dear Ashiq, You have left us far too early. Your enthusiasm and positive approach to life was our encouragement. Dear friend, when we opened the new Jafar Memorial Ground, it was as you envisaged, but minus the joy of seeing your face and listening to your prophetic words. It was you who led the way and you who filled us with the resolve to take on all challenges regardless of obstacles. Now, we pray for your everlasting peace and question not the Almighty who needs you more than us, but that we miss you desperately. Dear Ashiq, rest in peace until we meet again. Great servant of youth and Aitchison College, and your nation."


== Awards and decorations ==


== Foreign Honours ==


== References ==


== Notes ==