Bagh Ibne Qasim (Urdu: باغ ابنِ قاسم; lit. 'Garden of the Son of Qasim', in reference to Muhammad bin Qasim) is a 130-acre (53 ha) beachside park in Karachi, Pakistan. It is one the largest urban park in Karachi which was inaugurated in 2007 on the site of the former Toyland Theme Park near Clifton Beach. Named in honor of the 8th-century conqueror Muhammad Bin Qasim, the park is spread across a substantial 130 acres of land and feature historic structures such as the Jehangir Kothari Parade and Katrak Bandstand.
Bagh Ibn-e-Qasim is Karachi's largest urban park, inaugurated in 2007 on the site of the former Toyland Theme Park near Clifton Beach, and is spread across a substantial 130 acres of land. Named in honor of the 8th-century conqueror Muhammad Bin Qasim, the park incorporates historic structures like the Jehangir Kothari Parade and Katrak Bandstand. However, despite its significance as a major public recreational space, the park became embroiled in a civic controversy alongside Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Park (commonly known as Boat Basin Park) and Beach Park over the Karachi Metropolitan Corporation's (KMC) decision to demolish their boundary walls. This action was officially justified by KMC as an effort to enhance the city's aesthetics, but it drew significant protests from Clifton residents and opposition leaders who viewed the removal of protective walls as a highly suspicious move that would expose the valuable public land to commercial encroachment, which is prohibited by court rulings.


== Location ==
The park is located near the Clifton Beach, Karachi and is Karachi's largest urban park, covering 130 acres (0.53 km2). The northern edge begins at Jehangir Kothari Parade, and ends near the coast of the Arabian Sea. It encompasses the Jehangir Kothari Parade, built in 1919, as well as the Katrak Bandstand. The Lady Lloyd Pier, built in 1921, stretched from what is today Shahrah-e-Firdousi to the waterline of the shore through what is today the park. Two historic fountains are situated within the park, the Pirojbai Hormusji Khajurina Fountain from 1936, and the Motumal Shewaram Setpal Fountain, also from 1936.


== History ==
The park encompasses what was previously known as the Rupchand Bilaram Park, which was almost 400 acres (160 ha) in size. In 1964, the park's size was reduced to 132 acres after the Karachi Municipal Corporation leased out land for development. In 1966, the Karachi Development Authority assumed control of the park, and in 1974, renovated several structures in the park. A sea wall to the east was made at this time, which lead to the coastline retreating further from the southern edge of the park. The Jehangir Kothari Parade, Katrak Bandstand, Lady Lloyd Pier, and the 2 fountains were protected in 1994 by the Sindh Cultural Heritage Preservation Act. In the years afterwards the area fell into gradual decay as successive governments neglected to maintain the site. By 2001, the park was barren and considered a "virtual wasteland."

Construction on the new park began on 22 July 2005. The park was ceremonially opened by then President Pervez Musharraf on 27 February 2007 at a cost of PKR 600 million, and renamed after the 8th century Arab conqueror, Muhammad Bin Qasim of the Umayyad empire. The park quickly gained popularity and became a venue for different events. By 2015, the park again began to fall into decay due to lack of maintenance. A large three-level intersection on Shahrah-e-Firdousi, as well as the allegedly illegal seizing of land for the 62-floor Bahria Icon Tower further deteriorated the park's environment.

In April 2017, the park again was renovated by the Karachi Metropolitan Corporation, and the park was re-opened by Prime Minister Imran Khan on 30 March 2019. In October 2019, the park hosted the opening of the Karachi Biennale.


== Features ==
The park is spread over 130 acres (53 ha) near the Arabian Sea coast. The northern edge of the park includes the 1919 Jehangir Kothari Parade, the Katrak Bandstand, and former Karachi Aquarium. The 1921 Lady Lloyd Pier begins at the northern edge of the park near the Jehangir Kothari Parade, and extends 600 ft (180 m) into the park.
The park also has a turtle pond, murals of dinosaurs, 24 washrooms, a mosque, 20 stone canopies and a large rose garden. It overlooks the 90 m (300 ft) Port Fountain of Karachi Port Trust (KPT).


== Significance ==
Many large public gatherings and events are frequently held here due to its huge size of park grounds, for example the centennial celebrations for the renowned Pakistani poet Faiz Ahmad Faiz in November 2011. Events that have taken place in the park include the Sindh Festival 2014.


== Gallery ==


== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==
All Parks in Karachi – (CDGK.com) Archived