Central Jail Rawalpindi (also known as Adiala Jail) is a prison located in Rawalpindi, Pakistan.


== History ==
The Central Jail Rawalpindi was built from the late 1970s and early 1980s during the military regime of General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, after the execution of Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, the ex-Prime Minister of Pakistan on 4 April 1979 in District Jail Rawalpindi. The older jail was demolished and converted into Jinnah Park. The jail is situated in Rawalpindi – Adyala Road near village Dahgal about 13 kilometres toward west of district courts and the defunct/demolished old District Jail Rawalpindi. The village Adyala is about 4 kilometres west of the jail.


== Former prisoners ==
Erik Audé: American actor, stuntman, restaurateur, and professional poker player who was arrested and imprisoned in Pakistan.
Hanif Abbasi: PMLN Leader Former MNA from Rawalpindi.
Ayyan Ali: model and singer.
Muhammad Safdar Awan, son in law of Nawaz Sharif and former Member of the National Assembly (MNA) from Rawalpindi and Mansehra.
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto: PPP Leader former president of Pakistan and father of Benazir Bhutto.
Yusuf Raza Gillani: PPP Leader Former Prime Minister of Pakistan.
Mirza Tahir Hussain: Served eighteen years in the jail for the murder/manslaughter of a taxicab driver. Released on 17 November 2006 on parole
Lieutenant General Javed Iqbal (Retired) – Sentenced to 14 years of rigorous imprisonment by a military court on account of spying. Held key positions in the military during his active service, including director-general of military operations, which is responsible for planning and executing all operations inside and outside of Pakistan. Also held the post of adjutant-general, who supervises discipline and accountability within the forces.
Zakiur Rehman Lakhvi: alleged November 2008 Mumbai Attacks mastermind. Served six years on terrorism charges.
Allama Mashriqi:  British Indian, and later, Pakistani mathematician, logician, political theorist, Islamic scholar and the founder of the Khaksar movement.
Maryam Nawaz: PMLN Leader daughter of Nawaz Sharif.
Mumtaz Qadri: Assassin to the former Punjab Governor Salman Taseer.
Saifur Rehman, chairman of National Accountability Bureau.
Raja Rizwan: Pakistan Army Brigadier and military attache – Sentenced to death by a military court on account of spying.
Nawaz Sharif, PMLN Leader former Prime Minister of Pakistan
Imran Khan, former PTI Chairman former Prime Minister of Pakistan.


== See also ==

Government of Punjab, Pakistan
Headquarter Jail
National Academy for Prisons Administration
Punjab Prisons (Pakistan)
Prison Officer


== References ==