Jamia Darul Uloom Haqqania (Urdu: جامعہ دار العلوم حقانیہ) is an Islamic seminary in the town of Akora Khattak, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, northwestern Pakistan.
The seminary propagates the Hanafi Deobandi school of Sunni Islam. It was founded by Abdul Haq Akorwi along the lines of the Darul Uloom Deoband seminary in India, where he had taught.
It has been dubbed the "University of Jihad" due to the future occupations of its alumni. A number of leading members of the Taliban, including past chief Akhtar Mansour and leader of Haqqani network, Sirajuddin Haqqani studied here.


== History ==
The seminary was founded on 23 September 1947 by Maulana Abdul Haq in Akora Khattak, making it one of the first Islamic seminaries established in Pakistan. Haq was a graduate and former teacher of Darul Uloom Deoband in India. 
Abdul Haq served as the new institution's chancellor and its Shaykh al-Hadith and was recognized for his lifelong dedication to teaching the Hadith at the madrasah.
He was succeeded as chancellor by his son, Sami-ul-Haq, a leader of the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam. Sami-ul-Haq, often referred to as the "Father of the Taliban,"  was recognized for his role in educating many Taliban leaders and commanders. He maintained close ties to Taliban founder Mullah Mohammed Omar. Under his leadership, the seminary became known as the alma mater of numerous prominent Taliban members. also among his notable students is Maulana Fazl-ur-Rehman, who later became the emir of the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (F).
In November 2018, Sami-ul-Haq was assassinated at his residence in Bahria Town, Rawalpindi. The attack occurred at approximately 7:00 p.m. PST. He died from excessive blood loss after being stabbed multiple times.
Following the assassination, the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa government declared a National day of mourning. Prime Minister Imran Khan condemned the murder saying "the country has suffered a great loss".
In 2018, following the assassination of Sami-ul-Haq, Islamic scholars including figures like Ahmad Ludhianvi, Abdur Razzaq Iskander and Fazal-ur-Rehman convened at Akora Khattak, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and unanimously appointed his brother, Anwar-ul-Haq Haqqani, as the new chancellor of Darul Uloom Haqqania.
His younger brother, Rashid Ul Haq Sami, was appointed to the post of vice-chancellor. He succeeded Anwar-ul-Haq, who previously held the position. while position of Emir within the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (S) was passed to Sami-ul-Haq's son Hamid Ul Haq.


=== 2025 bombing ===

On 28 February 2025, a suicide bombing occurred in the seminary. The attack took place during Friday prayers, resulting in the deaths of at least six individuals, including the prominent cleric and deputy head of the seminary, Hamid Ul Haq Haqqani.
In 2025, following the assassination of Hamid Ul Haq, Islamic scholars appointed his son, Abdul Haq Sani, as the new emir of Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (S).


== Functioning and selection process ==
The seminary operates a large boarding school and high school serving thousands of students, alongside a network of 12 affiliated smaller madrassas.
Its academic program offers an eight-year Master of Arts in Islamic studies, which can be followed by a PhD after two additional years. According to journalist Ahmed Rashid, it is considered the most popular madrassa in northern Pakistan. 
Admission is highly competitive; for example, in February 1999, only 400 new students were accepted from 15,000 applicants. The institution also reserves 400 places for Afghan students.


== Notable alumni ==

The seminary is known for producing graduates who went on to become Islamist insurgents in Afghanistan, firstly mujahideen who fought against the Soviet Union in the Soviet–Afghan War, and later members of the Taliban, including senior leaders.
Notable graduates include the following:

Maulana Fazl-ur-Rehman, Emir of the Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (F).
Mohammad Yunus Khalis (c. 1919–2006), important mujahideen commander
Jalaluddin Haqqani (1939–2018), founding leader of the Haqqani network
Akhtar Mansoor (c. 1968–2016), former leader of the Taliban
Sirajuddin Haqqani, minister of interior of the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan
Mullah Omar, founding leader of the Taliban, did not study there, but was granted an honorary doctorate
Azizur Rahman Hazarvi, senior leader of Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (F).
Muhammad Fareed, Shaykh al-Hadith of Darul Uloom Haqqania.
Muhammad Musa Ruhani Bazi, Prominent philosopher and author.
Naeem Wardak, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan
Syed Sher Ali Shah , Pashtun Islamic scholar.
Ghulam Ur Rehman, Chairman of Higher Education Commission Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.


== See also ==
Madrassas in Pakistan
Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam (S)
Soviet–Afghan War


== Notes ==


== References ==
molana Rashid Ul haq sami (vice chancellor)


== External links ==
تصوف کی ترویج و اشاعت میں جامعہ دارالعلوم حقانیہ کے کردار کا تحقیقی جائزہ
Education mullah style Archived 12 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Tony Cross, Radio France Internationale, 11 May 2008
Pakistan: The Taliban takeover, Ziauddin Sardar, New Statesman, 30 April 2007
Maulana Sami ul-Haq: Father of the Taliban, Center for Strategic and International Studies Post-Conflict Reconstruction Project, 27 Jan 2009