Faiz Ullah Kamoka (born 6 July 1970) is a Pakistani politician who was a member of the National Assembly of Pakistan from August 2018 to April 2022. On 5 December 2019 he was elected as Chairman Standing Committee on Finance, Revenue and Economic Affairs after the resignation of Asad Umar.


== Early life and education ==
Faiz Ullah Kamoka was born on 6 July 1970 in Faisalabad, Pakistan.
He received the degree of Bachelor of Commerce from Hailey College of Commerce and the degree of Master of Business Administration in Finance from Punjab College of Business Administration in 1999.


== Political career ==
Faiz Ullah Kamoka was elected to the Provincial Assembly of the Punjab as a candidate of Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) from Constituency PP-68 (Faisalabad-XVIII) in the 2002 Pakistani general election. He received 19,417 votes and defeated Mian Zulfiqar Inayat, a candidate of Pakistan Muslim League (N) (PML-N).
He contested the 2008 Pakistani general election as a candidate of Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) from Constituency PP-68 (Faisalabad-XVIII). He was defeated by Sheikh Ijaz Ahmad of PMLN in that election by a heavy margin of 13455 Votes.
He contested the 2013 Pakistani general election for MNA National Assembly of Pakistan as a candidate of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) from Constituency NA-109 (Faisalabad-IX). He was defeated by Mian Abdul Mannan of PMLN in that election by a heavy margin of 55,313 Votes.
Faiz Ullah Kamoka was elected to the National Assembly of Pakistan as a candidate of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) from Constituency NA-109 (Faisalabad-IX) in the 2018 Pakistani general election.
On 5 December 2019 Faiz Ullah Kamoka was elected as Chairman Standing Committee on Finance, Revenue and Economic Affairs following the resignation of Asad Umar. Faiz Ullah Kamoka resigned from the National Assembly in January 2023.


== Corruption Charges ==
In April 2023, the Anti-Corruption Establishment (ACE) of Punjab summoned Faiz Ullah Kamoka and other officials in a corruption probe amidst the current government's nation-wide crackdown on PTI officials regarding their corruption.
Faiz Ullah along with his frontmen Haseeb Tipu took Millions of Rupees as bribe for facilitating Real Estate Developers.
In May 2023, National Accountability Bureau (NAB) summoned Faizullah Kamoka and his brother Kaleem Ullah Kamoka in a corruption probe.
According to the NAB, Faizullah Kamoka along with his brother caused a loss of over Rs400 million to the Parks and Horticulture Authority, Faisalabad. During his tenure, Mr Kamoka colluded with officials to commit corruption.
“He was promoting business by installing 100 LED poles on Harianwala Road and Susan Road in Faisalabad without a contract for five years,” it said, adding he extorted millions of rupees from people through illegal advertising business and did not deposit any money in the treasury for government contracts.
Each LED contract is different as per Parks and Horticulture Authority rules, it said.


== Parting Ways with PTI ==
In May 2023; Faiz Ullah Kamoka announced to quit PTI while addressing a press conference at Press Club.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Faiz Ullah Kamoka", Personal Profile, National Assembly of Pakistan, retrieved Jun 10, 2022


== More Reading ==
List of members of the 15th National Assembly of Pakistan