This article contains a list of prominent Hindus from Pakistan.


== Sports ==
Anil Dalpat, First Hindu cricket player of Pakistan.
Danish Kaneria, former cricketer.
Lal Kumar, U-19 cricketer.
Mohinder Kumar, former cricketer.
Rajesh Ramesh, former cricketer.
Anop Santosh, national level cricketer


== Bureaucrats ==


=== Jurists ===
Rana Bhagwandas, former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Pakistan.
Suman Pawan Bodani, first Hindu woman to be appointed as Civil Judge.


=== Officials ===
Pushpa Kumari Kohli, first Hindu woman Police Officer in Pakistan
Manisha Ropeta, first Hindu Woman Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP) in Pakistan


== Culture ==
J.C. Anand, film producer and distributor
Deepak Perwani, actor and Fashion Designer
Shabnam, Bangladeshi actress (former East Pakistan)


== Politics ==
Rana Hamir Singh, current Ruler of Umerkot and President of Pakistan Hindu Party.
Rana Chandra Singh, former Federal Minister of Pakistan and founder of Pakistan Hindu party.
Tara Chand, former Provincial Minister of Balochistan.
Mukesh Kumar Chawla, former Minister of Excise And Taxation of Sindh.
Kamini Kumar Dutta, former Law Minister of Pakistan.
Amar Lal, Special Adviser in control of Madrasas in Pakistan.
Ramesh Kumar Vankwani, politician and founder of Pakistan Hindu Council
Mahesh Kumar Malani, first Hindu to win a General Seat in the National Assembly of Pakistan.
Ratna Bhagwandas Chawla, first Hindu Woman Senator of Pakistan
Krishna Kohli, Member of the Senate of Pakistan
Arjun Das Bugti, Deputy Speaker of Balochistan Provincial Assembly from 1993 to 1996
Santosh Kumar Bugti – Politician and member of Provincial Assembly of Pakistan from 2013 to 2018
Chettan Mal Arwani – Reserved seat for non-Muslims in Sindh Provincial Assembly
Bherulal Balani, politician from Tharparkar
Canteswar Barman, member of 2nd National Assessment of Pakistan
Krishan Bheel, politician and member of Pakistani Muslim League
Gian Chand – Politician and member of senate of Pakistan since 2015
Lal Chand, former member of Pakistan's Provincial Sindh Assembly
Lal Chand Malhi – Member of National Assembly of Pakistan from 2018 to 2023
Bhawan Das – Member of National Assembly of Pakistan from 2008 to 2018
Heman Dass – Member of Senate of Pakistan
Sanjay Gangwani – Politician and close associate of former Prime Minister Imran Khan
Reeta Ishwar – Women Politician and member of National Assembly of Pakistan from 2013 to 2018
Khatu Mal Jeewan – Member of Senate of Pakistan
Kishan Chand Parwani – Served as member of National Assembly of Pakistan
Kheal Das Kohistani – Politician and member of National Assembly of Pakistan from 2018 to 2023
Danesh Kumar – Member of Provincial Assembly of Balochistan
Hari Ram – Politician and 5 Time legislature from Sindh Assembly
Ramesh Lal – Member of National Assembly of Pakistan
Manwer Lal – Member of National Assembly of Pakistan
Sham Lal (politician) – Member of Provincial Assembly of Balochistan
Sanjay Perwani – Member of Provincial Assembly of Sindh
Darshan Punshi – Member of National Assembly of Pakistan
Jai Parkash Ukrani – Member of National Assembly of Pakistan
Mangla Sharma – Member of Provincial Assembly of Sindh
Ram Singh Sodho – Former member of Sindh Provincial Assembly
Seth Sukhdev – Member of Constituent Assembly of Pakistan after Independence
Prem Hari Barma – Bengali Politician
Raj Kumar Chakraverty – Bengali Politician
Sris Chandra Chattopadhyaya – Member of First National Assembly of Pakistan
Akshay Kumar Das – Bengali Hindu Politician
Basanta Kumar Das – Member of Second National Assembly of Pakistan
Jnanendra Chandra Majumdar – Representative in constituent Assembly of Pakistan
Birat Chandra Mandal – member of 1st National Assembly of Pakistan
Rasaraj Mandal – member of 2nd National Assembly of Pakistan
Bhabesh Chandra Nandi – Representative in constituent Assembly of Pakistan
Dhananjoy Roy – Member of 1st National Assembly of Pakistan
Sailendra Kumar Sen – Member of 2nd National Assembly of Pakistan
Harendra Kumar Sur – Member of Constituent Assembly of Pakistan


== Others ==
Sunny Balwani – Businessman
Fakeero Solanki – Sculptor
Surendar Valasai – Journalist
Sobho Gianchandani – Writer and Scientist
Hindu Singh Sodha – Pakistani Hindu Refuge Worker
Veeru Kohli – Human Rights Activist
Bhawani Shankar Chowdhry – ICT and National award winner
Manu Bheel former bonded laborer and human rights activist from Sindh


== References ==