The Namal University is a private university in Rikhi, Mianwali District, Punjab, Pakistan. It is located on 30 km, Talagang Mianwali Road near Namal Lake.


== History ==

In 2002, Imran Khan began developing the concept of establishing a college adjacent to Namal Lake in the Mianwali District after observing high unemployment rates among the youth, many of whom were unskilled. After being appointed Chancellor of the University of Bradford in 2005, Imran Khan initiated efforts to establish a connection between his proposed Namal College and the university. In December 2005, an agreement was reached to grant Namal College associate status at the University of Bradford. The construction of the college began in 2006 and it was inaugurated as Namal College in 2008 by Imran Khan. The college was then affiliated with the University of Bradford and later it established the Imran Khan Foundation to fund scholarships for more than 90 percent of students who would study at the college coming from humble backgrounds. The 40 kanal of land area for the college was provided by the Government of Punjab, Pakistan.
In 2007, Imran Khan invited ten students from Bradford to spend a week studying at Namal College in Pakistan. The program aimed to educate participants about the economic, cultural, and social challenges facing Pakistan and to observe the effects of globalization on developing countries. The initiative was organized by the Yorkshire regional team of the Young Enterprise organization and supported by Bradford Kickstart of the Bradford Council.
In 2009, Namal College enrolled its inaugural class of 68 students in programs including computer science, software engineering, and network administration.
In 2019, Namal College became a degree awarding institute (DAI) and was renamed as Namal Institute.


== Administration ==
Imran Khan is the chairman of Board of Governors Namal Education Foundation which is the sponsoring body of Namal Knowledge City including this institute.


== See also ==
List of universities in Pakistan

List of universities in Islamabad
List of universities in Punjab, Pakistan
List of universities in Sindh
List of universities in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
List of universities in Balochistan
List of universities in Azad Kashmir
List of universities in Gilgit-Baltistan


== References ==


== External links ==
NAMAL official website