Malik Nur Khan Awan (22 February 1923 — 15 December 2011) known as the Man of Steel, The Man With The Midas Touch, and informally, Nuroo, was a three-star rank officer who led the Pakistan Air Force in the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965, a politician, sports administrator, airline executive and statesman who served as the third Commander-in-Chief of the PAF from 1965 to 1969 and sixth Governor of West Pakistan from 1969 to 1970.
Born in the Punjab Province, Khan graduated from Chief's College, Lahore and Prince of Wales Royal Indian Military College. At the college, he gained fame for his boxing skills and joined the Indian Air Force Volunteer Reserve in 1940. At the age of 17, he was commissioned into the Royal Indian Air Force as a fighter pilot in 1941 and trained with the Royal Air Force as a gunner and bomber pilot. He was later deployed to Burma and flew sorties against Imperial Japan in World War II. In May 1944, he conducted a dive-bombing mission on a bridge at the Arakan front.
In 1945, Khan served as Flight Commander. After the Partition of British India in 1947, Khan opted for the Royal Pakistan Air Force and commanded PAF Station Chaklala. Subsequently, he became the first air attache of Pakistan to London and later the second commandant of the RPAF College. In 1958, Flight highlighted Air Commodore Nur Khan's leadership of No. 1 Group PAF and described him as "probably the youngest air officer anywhere in the world" at the age of 35.
Widely regarded as Pakistan's greatest administrator, Khan was known for his intellect and management abilities, which largely benefited the country in both sports and aviation. As managing director of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) from 1959 to 1965, he transformed the airline into one of the world's frontline carriers. During this period, he acquired several properties for the airline, including the Roosevelt Hotel in New York City, the Scribe Hotel in Paris, the Central Hotel in Abu Dhabi, and the Minal Hotel in Riyadh. He also set up the intercontinental chain of hotels in Pakistan and the Malam Jabba ski resort. His tenure, along with that of his successor Asghar Khan, is often referred to as the "golden years of PIA" in the aviation community. PAF Base Nur Khan is named after him.
Shortly before the outbreak of the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965, Nur Khan succeeded Air Marshal Asghar Khan as Commander-in-Chief of the Pakistan Air Force.


== Early life ==
Malik Nur Khan was born on 22 February 1923 in Tamman into a Punjabi Awan family with a distinguished military heritage. His father, Subedar-major Malik Mihr Khan  (d. 1963) served as a Viceroy's Commissioned Officer in the British Indian Army from 1914 to 1936, was deployed to France and Belgium in World War I from 1914 to 1916, and was the aide-de-camp to General Sir John S.M. Shea, the Commander-in-Chief of Eastern Command (India) and his successor General Norman MacMullen.
The family bore the title "Malik", meaning "Ruler", a designation commonly associated with Awan lineages. Among Nur Khan's relatives were the Nawab of Kalabagh and Sardar Mumtaz Khan, a politician.
Nur Khan began his education at the Government Middle School in Tamman and attended the Colonel Brown Cambridge School, where he became friends with Bikram Singh, who later became a board member of the Civil and Military Gazette. He subsequently enrolled at the Chief's College, Lahore, where he earned a diploma in science. In 1934, he joined the Prince of Wales Royal Indian Military College, where cadets were divided into sections known as houses. Nur Khan and Asghar Khan were members of the Rawlinson House, while Sahabzada Yaqub Khan belonged to Kitchener House.
On his entry form, Principal Malcolm Hailey, 1st Baron Hailey, remarked: "An excellent military family from a very military center. The boy has been well educated and is more advanced than many Awans of his age. He is physically fit and should make an officer anyhow, he is the right type."
At the college, Khan gained a reputation as a "killer" boxer and a devout Muslim. He went on to earn a Bachelor of Arts in military administration. After completing his initial training at the Initial Training Wing in Lahore by May 1941, he proceeded to No. 1 (I) SFTS, finishing his flying syllabus by late November that year.
Khan later advanced his military education at several institutions, including the Joint Services Staff College (UK), the RAF Staff College, Andover, and the PAF Staff College.


== Service years ==


=== Royal Indian Air Force ===

Nur Khan joined the Indian Air Force Volunteer Reserve during World War II and went for air crew training with the Royal Air Force in December 1940.
After graduating from the Prince of Wales Royal Indian Military College as part of the 6th Pilots Course, Nur Khan was commissioned into the Royal Indian Air Force (RIAF) as a fighter pilot on 6 January 1941, at the age of 17. His family paid for his flying lessons from the Northern India Flying Club in Lahore, where he learned how to fly the de Havilland Tiger Moth and received his pilot's A-license.


==== World War II ====

In the United Kingdom, Khan trained with the Royal Air Force as air crew and received additional training as a gunnery and bomber pilot. Upon returning to British India in 1942–43, he was deployed to the Burma campaign with the Royal Indian Air Force as part of the occupation forces fighting against Imperial Japan. On 20 May 1944, he dive bombed a bridge on the Arakan front.
In the mid-1940s, Nur Khan was an active supporter of the Pakistan Movement, a stance that often made him the subject of teasing by his commanding officer, Flight Lieutenant Erlic Pinto. Fellow officer, Raja Gohel, fought over Khan's pro-Pakistani views, leading to a physical altercation in which Nur struck Gohel. According to Air Commodore (retd) A.C. Chacko, "Raja went literally mad with fury and we had all the trouble to prevent him bashing Nooru's head with a brick."


=== Pakistan Air Force ===


==== Initial years ====

After the Partition of British India on 14 August 1947, Nur Khan opted for the Royal Pakistan Air Force (RPAF) and was appointed as the Commander of PAF Station Chaklala.
In January 1948, Khan became the first Pakistani air attaché to the High Commission of Pakistan, London. In late 1948, he was asked to return to Pakistan and succeeded Asghar Khan as Commandant of the RPAF College on 15 September.
Khan was posted to the Air Headquarters in Rawalpindi as the Director of Organisation where he remained involved in the induction of aircraft under U.S. military aid from January 1950 until March 1951. That month, Khan was selected for a course at the RAF Staff College, Andover. Ezer Weizman in his autobiography, recalled an interaction with Khan while they were both studying at the college: "The following day I was approached by Wing Commander Nur Khan of the Pakistani air force. He was a formidable fellow and I was glad that he was Pakistani and not an Egyptian."
In the mid-1950s, Nur Khan was appointed as the F-86 Sabre program director. He strongly advocated for the induction of F-86's instead of Republic F-84 Thunderjet's into the Air Force, despite opposition by many, which often caused commotion during meetings, with Nur Khan going as far as threatening to resign. Nonetheless, he maintained his stance and the RPAF received the Sabre's.
Promoted to Group Captain in 1954, Nur Khan was appointed as Assistant Chief of Staff (Air) under Chief of Staff Air Commodore L. E. Jarman.
In response to the threat posed by the Soviet Union, Group Captains Asghar Khan, Nur Khan, and Wing Commander Abdul Qadir developed an expansion plan for the PAF in March 1954. This plan outlined a ten-year goal from 1954 to 1964, aiming to establish the Air Force with 768 aircraft across 44 squadrons. It included ten day-fighter squadrons, five night-fighter squadrons, six bomber squadrons, one reconnaissance squadron, twelve fighter-bomber squadrons, six tactical light bomber squadrons, two twin-engine and one four-engine transport squadrons, and two maritime squadrons. In May 1954, Pakistan entered a Mutual Defence Assistance Agreement with the United States (USA), securing substantial economic and military aid in exchange for access to PAF bases for launching reconnaissance flights into the Soviet Union.
From December 1955 to August 1956, Khan commanded PAF Station Peshawar. Afterwards, he commanded PAF Station Mauripur from August 1956 to October 1957, where he converted the aircraft of PAF fighter squadrons from reciprocating (or piston) to jet engines. He served at the Air Headquarters before he was appointed as Air Officer Commanding of the No. 1 Group PAF. At the time, the RPAF was organised into two groups: No. 1 Group Headquarters for Operations, based in Peshawar, and No. 2 Group Headquarters for Maintenance, located at Drigh Road. In 1958, Flight highlighted Air Commodore Nur Khan's leadership of No. 1 Group PAF, describing him as "probably the youngest air officer anywhere in the world" at the age of 35.
In 1957, Khan was appointed Chairman of the Committee responsible for the reorganisation of the Pakistan Air Force.


==== Pakistan International Airlines ====
Air Commodore Nur Khan was appointed as the head of the Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) as Managing Director in the afternoon of 6 March 1959. by President Ayub Khan. Nur Khan is credited for turning the airline into a profitable, internationally recognised entity. In late 1962, Nur Khan received a two-year extension in his position of managing director by the Government of Pakistan.


==== Commander-in-Chief (1965–1969) ====

On 23 July 1965, the outgoing Commander-in-Chief Air Marshal Asghar Khan handed over command of the Pakistan Air Force to Air Marshal Nur Khan. Asghar Khan did not brief him about Operation Gibraltar in Indian administered Kashmir as Asghar was not informed by the Pakistan Army either.
After a hiatus of six years without flying fighter jets, Nur Khan quickly regained familiarity with the cockpit by doing quick checkouts on the Lockheed T-33 before switching to an F-104 Starfighter and F-86 Sabre.
The Air Headquarters was suspicious regarding the secret operations undertaken by the army, due to previous subsequent skirmishes on the eastern border. Nur Khan met with Commander-in-Chief General Musa Khan who admitted that "something was afoot", with Nur Khan immediately responding "this could mean war". However, Musa tried to assure Nur Khan that India would not retaliate. Very few details of the plan were conveyed to both Nur Khan and Naval Chief Afzal Rahman Khan by the Pakistan Army leadership. Still skeptical, Nur Khan was told by General Musa to meet with the General Officer Commanding of Kashmir, Major General Akhtar Hussain Malik for further details, as he was in charge of Operation Gibraltar. Reportedly, Akhtar told Nur Khan, "don't worry, because the plan is to send in some 800,000 infiltrators inside the occupied territory to throw out the Indian troops with the help of the local population", with Akhtar claiming the plan was so perfectly designed that the Indians would not be able to retaliate and therefore Nur Khan and the PAF would not need to get into war-time mode.


===== Post-war =====

Air Marshal Nur Khan made two visits to China for the procurement of F-6 jets, the first visit was in November 1965 and the second in December 1967. According to Air Marshal Inamul Haque Khan, "Normally Premier Zhou Enlai did not meet military chiefs, but he had a liking for Nur Khan and thus graciously had dinner with him. F-6s were provided promptly at a crucial juncture almost free of cost, when we were passing through bad times."
On Pakistan Day 1966, the PAF exhibited Chinese weapons for the first time, including five Chinese-made Type 59 tank's and four Chinese-made Shenyang F-6 fighter jets, one of which was piloted by Nur Khan.


===== 1967 Arab–Israeli War =====
Air Marshal Nur Khan allowed the Pakistan Air Force to serve the Military of the Arab League against Israel during the Six-Day War. As a result, Pakistani Flt Lt Saiful Azam shot down four Israeli aircraft.


===== Ministership =====
Nur Khan served as Minister of Communications, Health, Labour and Social Welfare, Education, Rehabilitation and Works Division, and Family Planning Division from 5 April 1969 except for the Scientific and Technological Research Division to which he was appointed on 7 May 1969 until 3 August 1969.


===== Final years =====
On 3 April 1969, President Yahya Khan appointed a four-man military council of administration to run Pakistan. He appointed Air Marshal Nur Khan, Vice Admiral Syed Ahsan, and General Abdul Hamid Khan as Deputy Martial Law Administrators. On 12 July, Nur Khan led a Pakistani delegation in Peking, where he was welcomed by Tseng Kuo Hua. The following day, Tseng hosted a banquet in Khan's honor, and on 16 July, Khan held a banquet for Tseng.


===== Ministership =====
Nur Khan served as Minister of Communications, Health, Labour and Social Welfare, Education, Rehabilitation and Works Division, and Family Planning Division from 5 April 1969 except for the Scientific and Technological Research Division to which he was appointed on 7 May 1969 until 3 August 1969.


== Political career ==


=== Governor of West Pakistan (1969–1970) ===
Nur Khan's tenure was renewed and his retirement was overturned by President Yahya Khan who appointed him as the Governor of West Pakistan on 1 September 1969. He would go on to make major reforms in the country's political and educational structure.
A committee to overhaul the education system was set up with Nur Khan at the helm. The committee recommended that English should not remain the medium of instruction in Pakistan, rather Urdu and Bengali should be used.
In late 1969, Khan set up 19 industrial advisory panels for devising ways and means of stepping up production in all major industries in West Pakistan. He also supported the devolution of the controversial One Unit program and oversaw its termination in 1970. He announced new labour and educational policies to limit the role of politics in universities.


=== 1970s ===
Initially, after retiring as the Governor, Nur Khan joined the Council Muslim League in 1970. Throughout this period, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto criticised Asghar Khan and leaders of the Council Muslim League including Nur Khan for supporting Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
On 5 October 1970 in Lahore, Nur Khan accused Zulfikar Ali Bhutto of conspiring with certain bureaucratic elements within General Yahya Khan's government who sought to maintain dictatorial rule. He suggested that Bhutto was trying to seize power through backdoor dealings with the Pakistan Army's support.
Following the 1970 Pakistani general election, Asghar Khan and Nur Khan called for the transfer of power to Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and his Awami League, who had secured the majority.


=== 1980s ===
Nur Khan ran as an independent candidate in the 1985 Pakistani general election and was elected as a member of the 7th National Assembly from NA-43 (Attock-III) after receiving 69,828 votes.
In 1987, he joined the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) and contested from Constituency NA-44 in the 1988 Pakistani general election. Khan received 60,962 votes and lost to Islami Jamhoori Ittehad (IJI) candidate Sardar Mansoor Hayyat Khan Tamman who received 75,928 votes. He conceded his defeat and retired from politics soon after.


== Civilian career ==


=== Second term as Chairman PIA ===

In November 1973, Nur Khan was specially requested by Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto to return to the Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) as chairman. During this term, the airline began operating wide-body DC-10s and Boeing 747s. The iconic popular green and gold aircraft livery was introduced and Khan kept the PIA out of Pakistan's turbulent political arena, turning it into a sound commercial airline.
Nur Khan was a part of the delegations that accompanied Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto and his wife Nusrat Bhutto on their official state visit to Washington, D.C. on the invitation of President Gerald Ford from 4 February to 7 February 1975.
In March 1976, Nur Khan reported that the airline had achieved its highest growth in its history the previous year. Nur Khan resigned on 9 November 1979.


==== Squash Federation ====
From 1951 to 1963, Pakistan achieved remarkable success in Squash by winning the most coveted title, the British Open. Thereafter, it was a barren period for squash in the country as Pakistani players failed to get the title, with the closest being Aftab Jawaid, who managed to reach the finals and was a runner-up in 1966, 1967, and 1971. However, he did become the first Pakistani to win the British Amateur title in 1964 which was later discontinued.
When Nur Khan took over as the managing director of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) for the second time in 1973, he immediately took revolutionary steps and initiated what was known as the PIA Colts scheme. Young promising boys were scouted and given a monthly stipend, subsequently being coached and sent to participate in international tournaments with the PIA bearing the travel expenses. Whoever performed well on the international circuit was given permanent employment in the airline. The incentives did not end there, if any of the players achieved some major success in prime events, they were rewarded with a departmental promotion.
This led to a surfeit of world class Pakistani players in the 70s, namely Qamar Zaman, Gogi Alauddin, Hiddy Jahan, Mohibullah Khan and others. With there being at least six to seven Pakistanis among the top 10 in the world rankings.
On Nur Khan's request in 1975, legendary four-time winner of the British Open Squash Championships Azam Khan, who was running a squash club in England, trained Qamar Zaman, Mohibullah Khan, and Torsam Khan for the British Open. Subsequently, Qamar Zaman won and bought back the title to Pakistan after a 12-year drought.
Additionally, Nur Khan gave the squash world Jahangir Khan, a pure PIA colts product who would later become the greatest squash player of all time. The Pakistan Open initiated in 1980 and became a prestigious tournament. Pakistan also hosted the British Open Squash Championships.
In 1976, Nur Khan built the PIA Squash Complex in Karachi.


==== 1978 Hijacking incident ====
On 20 January 1978, PIA flight PK-453 heading from Sukkur Airport to Karachi was hijacked shortly after breakfast service when a man named Nazir Mohammad, armed with a revolver and dynamite stick entered the cockpit and ordered the pilots, Khaldoon Ghani and First Officer Kadir Gabol, to divert the flight to India for his cancer treatment. The captain, Khaldoon Ghani, told Nazir that the aircraft did not have enough fuel to go to India and that the plane could land in Karachi only. Karachi Airport was informed of the hijacking at 10:30am where the plane landed at 10:55am.
During the negotiations, Nazir demanded Rs. 10 million (equivalent to Rs. 51 million or US$180,000 in 2021) and US$1,000,000 (equivalent to $4,820,918 in 2024) for the release of passengers and crew, stating that he needed the money to enjoy his final days cut short by cancer. Nur Khan told Nazir that the PIA can make arrangements for treatment and offered to be kept as a hostage aboard the aircraft in exchange for the release of passengers and crew. Nazir rejected the offers but allowed the supply of food and water for the hostages in the aircraft. By night time, Nazir had released a total of 14 passengers and an air hostess.
Nazir sent a message to authorities that he wanted to talk to an "important person", Nur Khan accompanied by a Pakistan Army officer, entered the aircraft at around 11:50 PM. Following an hour of negotiations, Nur Khan pretended to walk away but abruptly turned around, attempting to seize the revolver from Nazir. The gun went off and Nur Khan was shot at point-blank range in his side. The aircraft crew then overpowered Nazir and he was arrested. Nur Khan was taken to PNS Shifa Hospital. The bullet was lodged about a centimeter from Nur Khan's spine. Nazir was later identified as a resident of Mianwali in his 30s, who worked in a hotel in Sukkur under the alias of Aslam Khan. He told police he was a Pakistan Army deserter of the Corps of Engineers. 
The same year, Nur Khan was awarded the Hilal-e-Shujaat (Crescent of Courage) for his actions.


== Personal life ==
"The more power you have, it demands much more from you; and if service to mankind on your part lacks, you have failed to discharge your responsibility, and you will be held accountable. Justice to the masses and sincerity of purpose in your actions must speak for themselves."- Nur Khan
Nur Khan married Shahzadi Farhat Sultan Begum in 1952. She was the eldest daughter of Captain Aziz ul-Mulk Shahzada Sultan Aziz, belonging to the Durrani dynasty. Farhat was also a cousin of Abida Sultan. They had four children. A son, Mansoor Khan, and three daughters, Sima Bibi, Nighat Bibi, and Faiqa Bibi. Begum Farhat died on 19 July 2016 after a prolonged illness and her funeral was held the following day at PAF Base Nur Khan.


== Later life ==
On 29 August 2006, he made headlines for his criticism of the actions of the leaders of the PML-Q, particularly President Shujaat Hussain and Secretary General Mushahid Hussain. Khan questioned their decision and hypocrisy to continue supporting the regime of Musharraf, especially after the controversial death of Akbar Bugti, caused by the Pakistan Army. Khan also said that Bugti's death was a blow to national unity.
Nur Khan pointed out that Shujaat and Mushahid portrayed themselves as close friends of the late Bugti, with Shujaat even acknowledging his indebtedness to Akbar Bugti for saving his father's life when Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto had ordered Bugti, who was the Governor of Balochistan, to have Shujaat's father Chaudhry Zahoor Elahi killed while he was in prison. Khan further criticised Mushahid's role, mentioning that Bugti had included Mushahid as one of the three individuals entrusted to hear his case, with a promise to accept their verdict. Khan questioned whether this was the appropriate way to repay trusted friends.


== Illness and death ==
Nur Khan had been admitted into the CMH Rawalpindi on 12 December 2011, as he was suffering from anemia and a chest infection. He died on 15 December 2011.


=== Reactions ===
Former Commander-in-Chief Asghar Khan said: "Nur Khan was a patriotic, devoted and a decorated son of Pakistan. Nur Khan served the country brilliantly and led the PAF from the front in 1965 war, the country and PAF would never forget him."
Retired Air Commodore Sajad Haider wrote: "He was my mentor, our Commander-in-Chief, a man who considered nothing impossible and proved it with his professional excellence, integrity and intrepidness. A legacy few air forces in the world could boast to have inherited. Farewell, my chief — I know you hated when I wrote in my book that you were a maverick, but you know that I meant you were incomparable and lightening fast at the draw. Pakistan’s history will place you at the highest pedestal of military leadership where few have preceded you. May your heroic and noble soul rest in heavenly peace."
Pakistani Squash legend Jahangir Khan commented, "Under him we had a golden period in cricket, squash and hockey and from Imran Khan to Zaheer Abbas and from me to Jansher Khan he helped develop a lot of players."
Pakistani cricketer Wasim Akram described Nur Khan as a legend off the field and stated, "We can't find an administrator like him now, what he did for sports in Pakistan will always be remembered."
Pakistani Olympian Hanif Khan remarked, "Field hockey is what it is because of him and because of his contribution, Pakistan held Olympic, World Cup and Champions Trophy titles simultaneously."
Chief of Air Staff Rao Qamar Suleman expressed grief over the demise of the PAF legend, recalling how Khan led the Pakistan Air Force and achieved parity over the three time bigger Indian Air Force in the 1965 war and was "the beacon of inspiration for all rank and file" of the air force.


=== Legacy and commemorations ===
In 1976, Herbert Feldman in his book, The End & The Beginning: Pakistan 1969-1971 noted, "Air-Marshal Nur Khan was a man cast in very different mold. An Awan from Campbellpur District in the Punjab, he was an efficient, aggressive officer with a touch of showmanship. He had the reputation of being tough and competent, with no patience for sluggards or backsliders. He was, for some time, managing director of Pakistan International Airlines and was credited with having done the job well. In the new set-up of March 1969 he was also regarded as the loner, the masterless man."
On 22 February 2012, the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) Auditorium was renamed to Nur Khan Auditorium on what would have been his 89th birthday. Here, several colleagues and friends paid tribute to him, including retired civil servant Roedad Khan, who said, "He was a man of unbounded vitality". In addition, the Pakistan Post launched a commemorative postage stamp in his honour. Similarly, Air Chief Marshal Rao Qamar Suleman presented a crest to Khan's widow, Begum Farhat.
In commemoration of his service, PAF Base Chaklala was renamed PAF Base Nur Khan on 10 October 2012.
The first Nur Khan Memorial Open Golf Championship was inaugurated on 25 May 2015 at the PAF Golf Club in Peshawar.


== Awards and decorations ==
Sitara-e-Quaid-e-Azam, 1958
Sitara-e-Pakistan, 12 January 1963
Midalja għall-Qadi tar-Repubblika, 1979


=== Foreign decorations ===


== Effective dates of promotion ==


== Further reading ==
"State Department cable 130100 to U.S. Embassy, Taipei, "Nur Khan's Meeting with Chou En-lai,"" (PDF). George Washington University. 5 August 1969.


== Notes ==


== References ==