Rana Mubashir is a Pakistani journalist, writer, talk show host, and political analyst. His work focuses on political analysis and investigative reporting, often addressing domestic and international issues.
Rana Mubashir has interviewed many political figures, including Prime Minister of Israel Shimon Peres, President of Pakistan Pervez Musharraf, Prime Minister of Pakistan Imran Khan, and President of Pakistan Arif Alvi.[1] Rana Mubashir is presently Vice President (Political Affairs) at Suno News and has held editorial roles, including current affairs consultant and news director, at Pakistani news channels such as Jang Group of Newspapers, Express News, Aaj News, and NewsOne Tv.
Rana Mubashir’s journalistic influence has been acknowledged internationally. His contributions were highlighted by an American journalist, Farah Stockman in her article which was published on 7 January 2021, for The New York Times, titled “I’m Haunted by Daniel Pearl’s Murder”, which described his role as a trusted journalist working with Farah Stockman during her professional assignments in Pakistan.


== Early life and education ==
Rana Mubashir was born in Rawalpindi and studied at St. Mary's Cambridge School Murree Road, Rawalpindi and Gordon College Rawalpindi. He later earned a Master of Science in Defence and Strategic Studies from Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad.


== Career in journalism ==
Rana Mubashir began his career at the Jang Group of Newspapers in 1990, where he worked until 2006. In 2006, he joined Pakistan Television - a state-owned TV channel, as Consultant Current Affairs. In 2009, Rana Mubashir joined NewsOne TV as Director of News and Current Affairs where he also hosted a TV show, "Rana Mubashir at Prime Time.”
In 2016, he joined Aaj News, where he hosted a prime time program, "Aaj Rana Mubashir Kay Sath." Since 2022, Rana Mubashir has been associated with Suno News, where he serves as Vice President - Political Affairs, and hosts a talk show, "BarAks with Rana Mubashir."


== Notable Interviews ==
Shimon Peres

28 January 2005: Rana Mubashir conducted an interview with Shimon Peres, the then Israeli Vice Prime Minister, for Daily "The News," Jang Group of Newspapers. The interview addressed Middle Eastern geopolitics and the potential normalization of diplomatic ties between Israel and Pakistan.
Pervez Musharraf

19 December 2013: In an interview titled "Prime Time: Pervez Musharraf Exclusive Interview with Rana Mubashir - After 9 Months of Silence", former President Pervez Musharraf described his return to Pakistan to participate in the 2013 Pakistan general election.
17 December 2014: In an interview aired on "Suno" on Express News, former President Pervez Musharraf discussed the 2014 Army Public School attack. The interview explored the issue of terrorism in Pakistan and former President Musharraf's perspective on the issue.
16 January 2015: In an interview aired on "Aaj Rana Mubashir Kay Sath" on Aaj News, former President Pervez Musharraf voiced his perspective on the need for counterterrorism measures, the establishment of military courts, and governance challenges in Pakistan.
19 April 2015: In an exclusive interview with former President Pervez Musharraf aired on "Aaj Rana Mubashir Kay Sath" on Aaj News, Rana Mubashir delved into various aspects of the former President's tenure, his perspectives on Pakistan's political dynamics, and his views on regional security issues.
5 September 2015: In an exclusive interview aired on "Aaj Rana Mubashir Kay Sath" on Aaj News, former President Pervez Musharraf shared his experience of the 1965 Indo-Pakistan War and his account of the Kargil Conflict.
1 March 2019: In an interview aired on Aaj News, former President Pervez Musharraf discussed his post-retirement life and reflected on his past tenure.
Imran Khan

2 October 2015: In an exclusive interview on "Aaj Rana Mubashir Kay Sath" on Aaj News, Imran Khan discussed his political journey and the challenges faced by his political party, PTI.
16 March 2016: in an interview on Aaj News, Rana Mubashir engaged with Imran Khan, discussing the legal challenges he faced and potential outcomes.
12 July 2016: In an exclusive interview on "Aaj Rana Mubashir Kay Sath" on Aaj News, Imran Khan elaborated on PTI's strategies and addressed political developments in Pakistan.
10 October 2017: In an interview titled: "Imran Khan Ka Yaqeen - Aaj Rana Mubashir Kay Sath" on Aaj News, Imran Khan voiced his opinion on various political issues and spoke about PTI's stance on national matters.
24 October 2022: In an exclusive interview on Aaj News, Prime Minister of Pakistan Imran Khan shared his perspective on Pakistan's evolving governance and regional security issues.
Arif Alvi

2 May 2023: In an interview aired on "BarAks" on Suno News,  President of Pakistan Arif Alvi discussed his role as the President and voiced his views on the political process in Pakistan.


== Controversies ==
In Pakistan, Rana Mubashir is the first journalist who rolled the ball, saying that Israel and Pakistan should have diplomatic ties. He is also the first Pakistani journalist to have interviewed any senior Israeli official. On 28 January 2002, he interviewed the then Israeli Deputy Prime Minister, Shimon Peres. The interview was published in the Daily "The News", Jang Group of Newspapers, and it addressed Middle Eastern geopolitics and the potential establishment of diplomatic ties between Israel and Pakistan. The publication of the interview in "The News" newspaper led to an attack by militants on the newspaper's offices in Karachi, resulting in vandalism and arson. This incident underscored the sensitivities surrounding discussions on normalization of Israel-Pakistan relations. 


== References ==


== External links ==
Rana Mubashir's Talk Shows - Archived