Awards and decorations of the Vietnam War were military decorations which were bestowed by the major warring parties that participated in the Vietnam War.  North Vietnam, South Vietnam, Australia, New Zealand and the United States all issued awards and decorations to their personnel during, or after, the conflict.
South Vietnam as a country ceased to exist after North Vietnam's victory in the Vietnam War. Therefore, the country of South Vietnam's awards and decorations are considered obsolete. With the fall of South Vietnam, that country's official records of who received which awards disappeared. Records or evidence of awards were sometimes maintained by U.S. military units or in an award recipient's service record, so those may be available to an award recipient looking for confirmation of a (defunct) foreign country award received.
Despite being obsolete, earned foreign South Vietnam decorations and awards remain authorized for US military members who received awards. If an award recipient no longer possesses an original award, companies or individuals have available for purchase South Vietnam's military insignia and awards.


== South Vietnam ==


=== Senior leadership decorations ===
National Order of Vietnam
 Grand Cross
 Grand Officer
 Commander
 Officer
 Knight
Vietnam Distinguished Service Order
 Army First Class Ribbon
 Army Second Class Ribbon
 Navy First Class Ribbon
 Navy Second Class Ribbon
 Air Force First Class Ribbon
 Air Force Second Class Ribbon


=== Heroism decorations ===
 Vietnam Military Merit Medal


=== Common decorations ===
Vietnam Gallantry Cross
 Vietnam Gallantry Cross with Palm Ribbon
 Vietnam Gallantry Cross with Gold Star Ribbon
 Vietnam Gallantry Cross with Silver Star Ribbon
 Vietnam Gallantry Cross with Bronze star Ribbon
Vietnam Civil Actions Medal
 First Class Ribbon
 Second Class Ribbon
 Vietnam Campaign Medal


=== Unit citations ===
 Vietnam Presidential Unit Citation
 Vietnam Gallantry Cross Unit Citation
 Vietnam Civil Actions Unit Citation


=== Other awards ===
 Vietnam Special Service Medal
Vietnam Armed Forces Honor Medal
 First Class Ribbon
 Second Class Ribbon
Vietnam Staff Service Medal
 First Class Ribbon
 Second Class Ribbon
Vietnam Air Gallantry Cross
 Vietnam Air Gallantry Cross with Gold Wing Ribbon
 Vietnam Air Gallantry Cross with Silver Wing Ribbon
 Vietnam Air Gallantry Cross with Bronze Wing Ribbon
Vietnam Navy Gallantry Cross
 Vietnam Navy Gallantry Cross with Gold Anchor Ribbon
 Vietnam Navy Gallantry Cross with Silver Anchor Ribbon
 Vietnam Navy Gallantry Cross with Bronze Anchor  Ribbon


== North Vietnam ==
 Ho Chi Minh Order
Defeat American Aggression Badge
Vietnam Liberation Order


== United States ==

Several decorations (Distinguished Flying Cross, Bronze Star Medal, Air Medal, Commendation Medal, Joint Service Commendation Medal) may be awarded for valor, or for merit. Awards for valor recognize bravery in action against an enemy and have an attached "V" device valor device. Awards for merit recognize service.
The Commendation Medal was another decoration of the Vietnam War, issued frequently in various versions by the different branches of the US armed forces.


== Australia and New Zealand ==
Australia and New Zealand awarded British and Commonwealth orders and decorations to their servicemen in Vietnam, including the Distinguished Service Order and the Military Cross
Australia and New Zealand jointly developed and instituted the Vietnam Medal (though separate Royal Warrants were issued). The obverse of the medal displays an effigy of Queen Elizabeth II, the reverse shows a man standing between two spheres, a symbolic representation of the ideological struggle. The ribbon incorporates the colours of the three armed services (red, navy blue, and sky blue), and the national colours of Vietnam (red and yellow).
In 1992, Australia struck the Vietnam Logistic and Support Medal. The medal was intended to recognise the Australian servicemen and civilians who provided support for Australian troops. The qualifying criteria for the Medal are service of one day or more as a member or crew of a ship or aircraft operating in the prescribed area of operations of Vietnam in support of Australian forces, or service of one day or more within the prescribed area of operations of Vietnam while attached to a unit or organisation in support of Australian forces. It has been awarded to military personnel, Qantas crews, civilian medical personnel, and Embassy staff.
Australia awarded four Victoria Crosses during the Vietnam War, two posthumously.
Australian servicemen were also awarded a number of individual US and South Vietnamese awards, and the following unit citations:

HMAS Hobart – US Navy Unit Commendation
HMAS Perth – US Navy Unit Commendation, US Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation
Clearance Diving Team 3 – US Presidential Unit Citation, Two US Navy Unit Commendations and one US Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation
817 Naval Air Squadron – US Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation
AATTV – Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross Unit Citation, US Meritorious Unit Commendation, US Presidential Unit Citation
1 RAR – US Meritorious Unit Commendation, Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross Unit Citation and Unit Citation for Gallantry
3 RAR – Unit Citation for Gallantry
'D' Coy, 6 RAR – US Presidential Unit Citation
8 RAR – Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross Unit Citation
No. 2 Squadron RAAF - Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross Unit Citation, USAF Outstanding Unit Award


== References ==


== External links ==
Australian Government Campaign Medals page
New Zealand Defence Force Vietnam Medal Page