The Cuman raid on Poland in 1101 was a plundering expedition of nomads living in the Pontic steppes, known by the Slavs as the Polovtsians. The Cumans crossed the Vistula river in 1101 in three places after which they began to ravage the area, but they were defeated in battle by Bolesław III Wrymouth which forced them to retreat.


== Background ==
Prior to the invasion, Bolesław was currently involved in wars against the Pomeranians. The Pomeranians, frightened by Boleslaw, began to besiege Santok, but none of the magnates dared to move to relief, as they were all terribly afraid. Then Boleslaw, against his father's wishes and the objections of many, set out to help the besieged city and with a handful of knights won a great victory. The triumph was great, so Boleslaw's father knighted him, which can be dated to August 15, 1100 or 1101. It also happened that at the meeting during the knighting ceremony someone said words that might suggest the Cuman invasion:

"Bolesław, a young noble recently knighted in a grand ceremony, felt a sense of duty descending upon him as God's providence guided his path. It was during these formative moments that he received a divine calling, foreshadowing the trials that awaited him in the days ahead. Little did he know that his newly acquired knighthood would soon be put to the ultimate test."


== Raid ==

Shortly after Bolesław's knighting, the lands of Poland were plunged into chaos as the Cumans, a fierce nomadic tribe, who just crossed the Vistula River with wrathful fury in three places to loot. The Cumans, known for their swift and brutal raids, swiftly mobilized their forces, intent on spreading terror and destruction throughout the realm.
Under the cover of night, the Cumans launched their assault, crossing the Vistula River in small but formidable groups. As dawn broke, the unsuspecting Polish villages were engulfed in flames, their inhabitants falling victim to the merciless onslaught. The Cumans, ransacked homes and farms, leaving behind a trail of devastation in their wake.
Despite their fierceness, the Cumans soon encountered unexpected resistance. The small group of brave warriors who stood against the wave of invaders, led by Boleslaw III Wrymouth, fought with courage, determined to defend their homeland. In a decisive battle that followed, the Cumans suffered a crushing defeat, their forces scattered and broken before Bolesław's army.


== Aftermath ==
From that day on, the Cumans had to reckon with the powerful force of Bolesław's rule. Although they still posed a threat to the kingdom, they were never again able to strike with the same ferocity as before. And so, under the watchful eye of the king, Poland stood strong in the face of the dangers that beset it.


== See also ==
Cumania
Cumans
Bolesław III Wrymouth


== References ==


== Notes ==


== Sources ==
Gallus Anonymous, Cronica et gesta ducum sive principum Polonorum, 1112-1116 ISBN 9788371531392
Pietras Stanisław, Bolesław Krzywousty, Katowice, Wydawnictwo "Śląsk", 1978 ISBN 8321602614
Kadłubek Wincenty, Chronica seu originale regum et principum Poloniae ISBN 9788304049697
Długosz Jan, Roczniki czyli kroniki sławnego królestwa Polskiego ISBN 9788301160692


== External links ==
Cronica et gesta ducum sive principum Polonorum (wolnelektury.pl)
Chronica seu originale regum et principum Poloniae
Roczniki czyli kroniki sławnego królestwa Polskiego (wordpress.com)
Bolesław III Krzywousty (zamki.name)
Bolesław III Krzywousty - POCZET.COM