The Democratic Government of Albania (Albanian: Qeveria Demokratike e Shqipërisë) also known as the Hoxha I Government was established on 20 October 1944 by the National Liberation Movement, as the Albanian partisan resistance of 1940–1944 came to a close. A provisional government took power after the liberation of the country from German forces on 28 November. Its interim Prime Minister was Secretary-General Enver Hoxha of the Communist Party of Albania. The interim government was to be in existence until the holding of elections and the convening of a Constituent Assembly.
The government was led by the National Liberation Movement (LANÇ), which in turn was dominated by the Communist Party.  From the outset, the Democratic Government was a Communist state.  It sidelined the nationalist Balli Kombëtar, a task made somewhat easier by large amounts of British support. King Zog I was effectively dethroned; the Democratic Government barred him from ever returning to the country. The LANÇ quickly established fraternal relationships with other Communist countries.
Elections were held on 2 December 1945.  By this time, the LANÇ had transformed itself into the Democratic Front of Albania, which was the only organization to contest the election.  On 10 January 1946, the People's Republic of Albania was proclaimed.


== Cabinet ==
Enver Hoxha - Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign Affairs and National Defense
Koçi Xoxe - Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Internal Affairs and Chairman of the Audit Committee
Tuk Jakova - Minister Without Portfolio, 6 February 1946 Minister of Industry
Haxhi Lleshi - Minister Without Portfolio
Manol Konomi - Minister of Justice, 6 May 1947 - 5 February 1948 Minister Ad. Interim Education
Spiro Koleka - Minister of World Affairs
Ramadan Çitaku - Kiço Ngjela (6 February 1948) - Minister of Finances
Nako Spiru - Minister of Economy, 13 March 1947 - President of the State Plan Committee
Medar Shtylla - Minister of Health
Gaqo Tashko - Minister of Agriculture
Sejfulla Malëshova (Naxhije Dume, 6 February 1948) - Minister of Education
Gogo Nushi (31 January 1947 - Minister of Commerce
Nesti Kerenxhi - Minister Without Portfolio and President of the State Plan Commission (29 May 1948)
Pandi Kristo - Minister Without Portfolio (1946) and Head of State Control (1947)
Mehmet Shehu - Minister of Communications and PTT (6 February 1948)


== See also ==
History of Albania


== External links ==
Declaration of the Democratic Government of Albania at the 2nd Meeting of the Anti-Fascist National Liberation Council of Albania
Speech to the Constituent Assembly on the Presentation of the Resignation of the Government


== References ==