The Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA) was an organisation established in 1939 by Basil Dean and Leslie Henson to provide entertainment for British armed forces personnel during World War II. ENSA operated as part of the Navy, Army and Air Force Institutes. In 1946 it was re-named to Combined Services Entertainment (CSE) operating under the Services Sound and Vision Corporation (SSVC), until 2 March 2020, when the SSVC re-branded to the British Forces Broadcasting Service (BFBS), with the CSE likewise re-branding as BFBS Live Events.
The first big wartime variety concert organised by ENSA was broadcast by the BBC to the Empire and local networks from RAF Hendon in north London on 17 October 1939. Among the entertainers appearing on the bill were Adelaide Hall, The Western Brothers and Mantovani. A newsreel of this concert showing Hall singing "We're Going to Hang out the Washing on the Siegfried Line" accompanied by Mantovani and His Orchestra exists.
Many members of ENSA later had careers in the entertainment industry after the war, including actors Terry-Thomas, Peter Sellers and Kenneth Connor.
Tap and acrobatic dancer Vivienne Hole, stage name Vivienne Fayre, a civilian aged 19, was the only ENSA member killed in the war. On 23 January 1945 in Normandy, she was being driven between shows as a passenger aboard a truck carrying stage scenery which strayed into a minefield. She was buried with full military honours in Sittard War Cemetery.


== In popular culture ==
Despite many extremely talented entertainers working for ENSA, the organisation was necessarily spread thin over the vast area it had to cover. Thus many entertainments were substandard, and the popular translation of the acronym ENSA was "Every Night Something Awful".
ENSA plays a modest role in the film Love Story (1944) in which Margaret Lockwood stars as a concert pianist who makes an ENSA tour to North Africa and the Mediterranean region. The film Desert Mice (1959) follows the fictional escapades of an ENSA troop with Sid James assigned to the Afrika Korps.
The only known ENSA theatre to have survived in its original condition is the Garrison Theatre at Hurst Castle in the New Forest National Park. Created by servicemen in 1939, the proscenium arch still bears the badge and grenades of the Royal Artillery, and the curtains still hang from an original galvanised gas pipe. Shows are presented from time to time by the Friends of Hurst Castle.


== Partial list of performers ==
Inga Andersen 
Avril Angers
Hermione Baddeley
John Barbirolli
Marie Burke
Helen Clare
Kenneth Connor
Noël Coward
Peter Cushing
Bebe Daniels
Alice Delysia
Lyle Evans
Gracie Fields
George Formby
Forsythe, Seamon and Farrell
Will Fyfe
Beryl Grey
Geraldo
Sonnie Hale
Adelaide Hall
Richard Hearne
Myra Hess
Stanley Holloway
Frankie Howerd
Gertrude Lawrence
Mary Lee
Cheryl Lind
Vera Lynn
Jessie Matthews
Laurence Olivier
Mantovani
Ivor Novello
Lennard Pearce
Bob and Alf Pearson
Arthur Riscoe
Thelma Ruby
Peter Sellers
Terry-Thomas
Hazel Vincent Wallace
The Western Brothers
Diana Wynyard


== References ==


== External links ==

SSVC website
'Chaos Supersedes ENSA' on IMDB