Malta Command was an independent command of the British Army. It commanded all army units involved in the defence of Malta. Once mobilised the Command deployed its headquarters to underground hardened shelters and its combat units were deployed to fixed points in the Maltese countryside, from where they operated. This mobilised, but largely static, army garrison would be tested by aerial bombardment and naval blockade during the Second World War. Whilst Malta Command was already a functioning command structure before 1939 (it had existed in the Great War and was specifically mentioned in a House of Commons debate of 12 February 1917), the Second World War would see the Command operate as a genuine war-fighting headquarters, albeit in a static defensive role.
On 15 April 1942 the Island of Malta was awarded the George Cross by King George VI in recognition of the stalwart defence and fortitude of service personnel and civilians against a much more powerful Axis foe. Malta, an island of only 117 square miles, had been more heavily bombed than London had been during their blitz.

 


== World War I and the Interwar years ==
Malta Command existed in 1916, 1917 and in 1929.
Between 1935 and 1936 the following infantry battalions were on the Island and part of Malta Command:

2nd Battalion The Lincolnshire Regiment
2nd Battalion The Rifle Brigade
1st Battalion The King's Own Scottish Borderers.


== 1939 - the peacetime garrison transitions to war ==
Malta's garrison was a single infantry brigade; comprising  the 2nd Battalion the Devonshire Regiment, 2nd Battalion the Queen's Own Royal West Kent Regiment, 1st Battalion the Dorsetshire Regiment and the 2nd Battalion the Royal Irish Fusiliers. An infantry territorial unit was also present, the 1st Battalion The King's Own Malta Regiment. The Malta garrison's artillery was largely fixed and consisted of light and heavy anti-aircraft; and coastal defence artillery regiments drawn from the Royal Artillery (RA) and Royal Malta Artillery (RMA). The Royal Engineers were also in evidence with British and Maltese serving in the Corps on the Island.


== The Reinforced Army Garrison ==
On 11 March 1942 Malta Command became subordinate to General Headquarters (GHQ) Middle East.


=== Infantry ===
In late 1939 the pre-war garrison was reinforced up to an infantry division (commanded by Major General Sir John Scobell). The original infantry garrison, plus the three brigades that reinforced the island's British forces, were titled 1, 2, 3, and 4 Brigades; but were subsequently renumbered in 1943 as follows:

231 Infantry Brigade – assigned to the Southern Sector under Brig L H Cox. HQ Southern Infantry Brigade at Luqa. Its infantry battalions were:
2nd Battalion The Devonshire Regiment
1st Battalion The Hampshire Regiment
1st Battalion The Dorsetshire Regiment
2nd Battalion The King’s Own Malta Regiment
3rd Battalion The King’s Own Malta Regiment
232 Infantry Brigade – assigned to the Northern Sector under Brig W H Oxley. HQ Northern Infantry Brigade at Melita Hotel Attard next to San Anton Gardens. Its infantry battalions were:
2nd Battalion, Royal Irish Fusiliers
8th Battalion, King's Own Royal Regiment (Lancaster)
8th Battalion, Manchester Regiment
233 Infantry Brigade – formed on 30 July 1941; assigned to the Central Sector under Brig I De La Bere. Its infantry battalions were:
11th Battalion The Lancashire Fusiliers
2nd Battalion The Queen’s Own Royal West Kent Regiment
10th Battalion The King’s Own Malta Regiment
234 Infantry Brigade – assigned to the Western sector under Brig F Brittorous. Its infantry battalions were:
4th Battalion The Royal East Kent Regiment (The Buffs)
1st Battalion The Durham Light Infantry
1st Battalion The Cheshire Regiment
Clifford Thomason Beckett remained at the Fortress of Malta for several years from 1941 and rose to the rank of Major-General of the Royal Artillery & Commander Anti-Aircraft Defences Malta.  During July and August 1942, Beckett acted as General Officer Commanding Troops for Malta following the departure of Major-General Daniel Marcus William Beak, VC, DSO, MC & Bar.


==== Light support weapons ====

Personal weapons such as the .303-in SMLE, 9mm Sten or .38 service revolver are not included in this study.


=== Artillery ===
The Island's regular Royal Artillery force component was - like its Maltese counterpart - performing a mainly fixed defence role, even wheeled artillery tended to occupy fixed positions to defend against a hostile landing at beaches:

4th Coast Regiment, RA made up of (a HQ Battery, 6th, 10th & 23rd Coast Batteries)
12th Field Regiment RA - initially equipped with 18 Pounder Field Guns, but later equipped with 25 Pounder Field Guns (the only real mobile artillery support for the infantry brigades).
26th Defence Regiment, RA made up of (a HQ Battery, 15th/40th & 48th/71st Defence Batteries).
The Royal Malta Artillery
Headquarters, RMA
1st Coast Regiment, RMA composed of (a HQ Battery, 1st, 2nd, 3rd & 4th Heavy Batteries)
The anti-aircraft defence was understandably dense and British and Maltese anti-aircraft (AA) units were interwoven into the following order of battle:


==== Heavy support weapons ====
By 1940 Malta Command had a small amount of modern mobile field artillery, much of its artillery was located in fixed positions in the anti-aircraft and coastal defence royal. It was manned by members of the Royal Artillery and Royal Malta Artillery.

For details of fixed artillery see Royal Malta Artillery's equipment list.


=== Royal Armoured Corps ===
Less than a full battalion of various reconnaissance and infantry support tanks was present on Malta.
By 1942 Malta Command Tanks had a small mixed force of tanks known as "Malta Tanks, Royal Tank Regiment" during its time on the island. The only other armoured vehicles were the Universal Carriers of the infantry units.


=== Combat and service support units ===
Source:


=== Local Maltese units (Regular and Territorial) ===
Critical to the success and resilience of Malta's was local commitment and bravery the following units were fully integrated in Malta Command:

The Royal Malta Artillery
The King's Own Malta Regiment
The Malta Fortress Squadron, Royal Engineers.


== End of the war and the post war period ==
On 2 December 1944 Malta Command regained its status as an independent command and it ceased its command relationship with GHQ Middle East in Cairo. The British would remember the war in a somewhat detached and romanticised fashion in films like The Malta Story; the Maltese never had a chance to record their views being viewed as 'plucky' citizens of a British colony.
General Officers Commanding from 1951-62 were:

Major-General William E.G. Hemming: October 1951-November 1953
Major-General Brian Daunt: November 1953-November 1956
Major-General Cyril Colquhoun: November 1956-December 1959
Major-General Adam J.C. Block: December 1959-October 1962
In 1954 Headquarters Malta Command occupied the Auberge de Castille, known locally as "The Castille".  British Troops Malta became again part of Middle East Land Forces in 1960.
Forces in Malta would be reduced from 1964 and this led to acrimony between the Maltese and British Governments, and the post independence period was a period of bitterness, British forces on the Island in the front line of Maltese antipathy. Major-General Lord Thurlow commanded in 1962-63. In 1965, 4th (Leicestershire) Battalion, the Royal Anglian Regiment arrived to join Malta Garrison at St. Patrick's Barracks on the north coast of Malta. Under Brigadier Lord Grimthorpe OBE, Malta Garrison consisted of 4 R Anglian; 1 Battalion The Loyal Regiment; 1st Regiment Royal Malta Artillery (partially a transport regiment); and 1st Battalion King's Own Malta Regiment (TA). 
Malta Garrison was in turn responsible to HQ Malta and Libya, under Major-General John Frost, with the other components being HQ Cyrenaica Area and HQ Tripolitania Area in Libya. Later, Major General Rea Leakey commanded HQ Malta and Libya in 1967-68.
1 Regiment Royal Malta Artillery served in Germany within the British Army of the Rhine from 1962 to 1970. In 1968 the then Prime Minister of Malta George Borg Olivier visited the Regiment in its barracks in Mulheim, and announced that the 1st Regiment RMA would cease to be part of the British Army of the Rhine in 1970 and could return to Malta to form the core of its land forces. Five hundred officers and men from the Royal Malta Artillery took their oath of allegiance and were enlisted in the Malta Land Force on 1 October 1970. Maltese Engineer and Signals personnel were also absorbed into the force that day.
Malta Command was largely wound up by 1977 with all major units repatriated to the UK. Salerno Company of 41 Commando Royal Marines finally left the island aboard the Royal Fleet Auxiliary Landing Ship Logistic Sir Lancelot on 31 March 1979.


== See also ==
Siege of Malta (World War II)
Lascaris War Rooms
Operation Herkules
Royal Signals in Malta
Middle East Command
Malta Story (the film)
Operation Husky
British Army during the Second World War


== References ==


== External links ==
Malta at War Museum
Lascaris War Rooms, Valletta Archived 2014-12-06 at the Wayback Machine
Imperial War Museum Photographic Archive
A Malta-based living history group keeping the RMA's heritage alive