Task Force White Eagle (in Polish referred as Polskie Siły Zadaniowe e brigade was under the command of the US 1st Cavalry Division. 30 October 2008 Polish forces taking over responsibility for Ghazni province. Throughout the activity of the Polish contingent in Afghanistan occurred fighting with the Taliban and other rebels. Polish troops took part in many military operations. During the mission 44 Polish soldiers were killed.


== Structures ==

The brigade was divided into two major elements. The kinetic element consisted of units that are going into direct contact with the enemy and the non-kinetic element consists of support and logistic units.

Kinetic elements
Battle Group A (battalion sized) - FOB Ghazni, FB Four Corners
1st Mechanized Infantry Company (five infantry platoons)
2nd Mechanized Infantry Company (five infantry platoons)
Logistic Company
Engineering Group
Battle Group B (battalion sized) - FOB Warrior, FB Giro, COP Qarabagh
1st Mechanized Infantry Company (five infantry platoons)
2nd Mechanized Infantry Company (five infantry platoons)
Logistic Company
Engineering Group
Special Operations Group - FOB Ghazni (JW Komandosów TF50, JW Grom TF49)
Reconnaissance Group - COP Ajiristan
Independent Air Group - FOB Ghazni

Non-kinetic elements
Psychological Operations Group
Civil-Military Co-operation Group
1st Tactical Support Group
2nd Tactical Support Group
Operational Mentoring & Liaison Team no 1 (3rd Brigade, 203rd Corps ANA)
Operational Mentoring & Liaison Team no 2 (1st battalion, 3rd Brigade, 203rd Corps ANA)
Operational Mentoring & Liaison Team no 3 (2nd battalion, 3rd Brigade, 203rd Corps ANA)
Provincial Reconstruction Team Ghazni (USA/POL)
Agriculture Development Team Ghazni (USA)
Medical Support Group - FOB Ghazni
National Support Element - FOB Ghazni
Detached Logistic Support Group
Forward Surgical Teams (USA) - FOB Ghazni


== Size ==


== Equipment ==

The basic combat vehicle of Battle Groups is KTO Rosomak in various variants. Rosomak is complemented by Cougar H (MRAP) (from late 2008) and HMMWV leased from the USA. Lightly armored HMMWVs are used only in situations that exclude use of heavier vehicles. Fire support is provided by 98mm M-98 mortars and 152mm Dana howitzers. Air support is provided by Independent Air Group using Mi-17 and Mi-24 helicopters as well as UAVs. From 2010 there were used MaxxPro MRAP, followed by Oshkosh M-ATV.


== See also ==
List of NATO installations in Afghanistan
List of Afghan Armed Forces installations


== References ==