Content Guru is a cloud communications provider based in Bracknell, UK. The company provides services in over 60 countries through its cloud Contact Centre, Storm. These services are provided directly to customers and with partners such as Vodafone, Cinos and Rakuten.  Clients include the National Health Service  and Serco.
In April 2016, Content Guru received a Queen's Award for Innovation.


== History ==
Content Guru is made up of a number of wholly owned subsidiaries of Redwood Technologies Group across North America, Asia-Pacific and Europe. The vast majority of the revenue generated by Redwood Technologies Group comes from the delivery of cloud services, provided and supported by Content Guru.
Content Guru was founded in 2005 and provides cloud-based customer engagement and customer experience services and cloud contact centre products. The company has offices in the US, Japan, Singapore, the UK, the Netherlands, Germany, Ireland and Italy.
In 2010, Storm was used by ComRes on behalf of ITV News to provide live audience polling for the first televised election leaders' debate in the build-up to the UK 2010 General Election.
In 2013, Content Guru co-founded Berkshire Community Foundation (BCF)'s Business Philanthropy Club (BPC), which enables businesses in Berkshire to provide funding for grassroots organizations and projects in their local communities. Content Guru has been a sponsor of the Pride of Bracknell Forest Awards since 2016, along with its parent company Redwood Technologies. Content Guru supports several local and national charities.
In March 2017, the company announced that it would be delivering services to the United States.
In January 2018, a minority stake of Content Guru and its parent company, Redwood Technologies Group, was sold to Scottish Equity Partners in a £25 million cash deal.
In February 2018, Content Guru announced a partnership with Rakuten Communications to deliver services to Japan.
In June 2019, Redwood Technologies Group acquired Weston Digital Technologies for its screen recording and quality monitoring functionality.
In early July 2020 Content Guru announced that its product could integrate with Microsoft Teams.
In July 2020, Content Guru was named as a supplier in Crown Commercial Service's Spark Dynamic Purchasing System.
In April 2021, Content Guru's parent company Redwood Technologies acquired US-based Potomac Integration and Consulting (PIC).


== Controversy ==
The company came under fire for its role in the Manchester Arena bombing of May 2017 during which Storm failed to operate. This resulted in those affected by the attack not being able to contact police or emergency services.
Vodafone had subcontracted its services out to Content Guru for providing the National Mutual Aid Telephony system. However, when they tried to use it they found an "inability to amend the recorded message and technical difficulties with the server. This suggests there was an inadequate level of knowledge or expertise within Vodafone or its sub-contractor Content Guru." "It took until 0300 GMT on 23 May, four-and-a-half hours after the attack, which took place just after 2230 GMT on 22 May, before a restricted local telephone number was running."
Vodafone and Content Guru continue their partnership, with Vodafone marketing Content Guru's product under the brand Vodafone Storm.


== References ==