Digital rain, or Matrix code, is the visual effect of vertically falling computer code popularised by the 1999 film The Matrix. The code is a way of representing the activity of the simulated reality environment of the Matrix on screen by kinetic typography. All four Matrix movies, as well as episodes of the spin-off The Animatrix, open with the code. It is a characteristic mark of the franchise, similar to the opening crawl featured in the Star Wars franchise.


== Background ==
In the film, the code that comprises the Matrix itself is frequently represented as downward-flowing green characters. This code uses a custom typeface designed by Simon Whiteley, which includes mirror images of half-width kana characters and Western Latin letters and numerals. In a 2017 interview at CNET, he attributed the design to his wife, who comes from Japan, and added, "I like to tell everybody that The Matrix's code is made out of Japanese sushi recipes"; this has been debunked by several people including some well known Japanese influencers.
The effect resembles that of older generation green screen displays of monochrome phosphorescent computer monitors. One predecessor of the digital rain exists in a "code-scene" of the movie Meteo, a Hungarian experimental-pop culture movie from 1990. The 1995 cyberpunk film Ghost in the Shell, a strong influence on The Matrix, features opening credits similar to the digital rain.
No official version of the code's typeface actually used in the Matrix trilogy and in the website for the game Path of Neo has been released. Several imitations have been made, mostly in the form of screensavers.


== Cultural impact ==

Dutch musician Arjen Anthony Lucassen named a track "Digital Rain", in honour of the movie, on his 2010 album Victims of the Modern Age by his band Star One.
The effect also inspired the creation of many unofficial Matrix screensavers, including the "GL Matrix" mode in XScreenSaver, and in the cmatrix program for Unix-like systems.


== See also ==

Monochrome monitor
Simulated reality


== References ==


== External links ==
Example implementation of the Matrix digital rain in Rust
Examples of Matrix digital rain implementations on Rosetta Code
Creator of The Matrix code reveals its mysterious origins