DriveNets  is a networking company that designs and sells infrastructure to telecommunications providers, networks, and organizations building AI systems, including hyperscaler organizations and NeoClouds (GPU-as-a-Service providers). Products include a networking operating system running on a White box, and an Ethernet-based  AI Fabric used for backend, compute, and storage networks.


== History ==
DriveNets was founded in 2015  by Ido Susan and Hillel Kobrinsky. Susan is the co-founder of Intucell, which he sold to Cisco for $475 million in 2013. Kobrinsky co-founded Interwise, which was acquired by AT&T for $121 million. DriveNets was in a stealth mode and was  self-funded until 2019.
In 2019, DriveNets raised $110 million in series A round from Bessemer Venture Partners and Pitango Growth, along with John W. Thompson and Stephen J. Luczo. In 2021, DriveNets raised $208 million in series B funding led by D1 Capital Partners with follow-on investments from Bessemer and Pitango and investment by Harel Insurance. In August 2022, DriveNets announced it completed Series C funding of $262 million led by D2 Investments, along with former investors Bessemer, D1 Capital, Pitango, Atreides Management, and Harel Insurance.  In 2025, AT&T acquired a 15% stake (approximately $750 million) in shares from DriveNets' employees and investors. The company's estimated value in 2025 was $5 billion. 
The company has approximately 100 customers, including AT&T  Comcast,  and KDDI. Among its  partners are Fujitsu, Broadcom Inc., Itochu Techno-Solutions, Wipro, EPCglobal,  and Accton. 
The company has 500 employees with offices in Israel, the USA, Japan, and Romania.   
In November 2023, DriveNets joined the Ultra Ethernet Consortium, an industry initiative aimed at developing optimal Ethernet for high-performance networking.


== Products ==
DriveNets has two product lines - Network Cloud and Network Cloud-AI. Both are based on a Disaggregated, modular network architecture deployed on commodity white box hardware.
The company’s Network Cloud product line is a cloud-native software-based solution that applies the architectural model of cloud shared infrastructure to communication service providers' networking, for a range of network use cases – from the core to peering to aggregation and to the edge, provisioned as microservices and containers. 
The company’s Ethernet-based GPU-to-GPU networking fabric product line is planned for hyperscalers and enterprises as a scalable replacement for InfiniBand in GPU cluster interconnections. 


== Technology ==
DriveNets furnishes a network operating system (NOS) designed for cloud-native infrastructures  for building networks.  The Network Cloud architecture provides a software-based routing framework that allows networks to scale linearly and predictably. 
The company has built software that runs on white boxes. This network virtualization to a shared infrastructure   creates a single, software-based entity. The company’s approach disaggregates the network, decoupling the control plane software from hardware. The disaggregated networking model is based on Open Compute Project (OCP) distributed Disaggregated Chassis (DDC) and Telecom Infra Project DDBR frameworks. 
In 2023, it introduced an AI infrastructure networking platform, Network Cloud-AI,  based on Fabric Scheduled Ethernet (FSE).
Fabric Scheduled Ethernet provides direct GPU connectivity in an architecture that uses standard Ethernet connections toward the client side but implements a hardware-based, cell-based scheduled fabric system to ensure predictable, lossless performance. 
In November 2023, DriveNets joined the Ultra Ethernet Consortium to build an Ethernet Fabric for high-performance networking. 


== See also ==
List of unicorn startup companies
Science and technology in Israel
Silicon Wadi


== References ==