Easy Redmine (also Easy Project) is project management software available in 80 countries worldwide. It functions as an extension to Redmine.


== History ==
Easy Software, a company behind Easy Redmine was established in 2006 by Filip Morávek who serves as a company's CEO and is also a founder of the Mindfulness Foundation. In 2007, the company released an open-source project management software based on Redmine that included modules for project financing — Easy Redmine. Easy Software also develops Easy Project – an identical product distributed in Czechia and Hungary. In 2021 Easy Redmine 11 was released with mobile application, Rails 6, Ruby 3.0, Sidekiq B2B CRM features. In 2022 Easy Redmine was available in 70 countries. In 2023 Easy Redmine 13 was released in collaboration with Scrum certified expert.


== Overview ==
Easy Redmine covers Waterfall and Agile project management individually or simultaneously. It is available in public and private cloud hosting or on-premises server. It's based on open-source technologies such as Redmine. It covers the complete process from planning through implementation to helpdesk support. Easy Redmine also implements techniques such as risk and resource management, mind maps and Gantt charts. The application includes a CRM module focused on the B2B segment with partner access control and partner network management. Easy Redmine 13 also has integration MediaWiki, the software that runs Wikipedia and GitLab, an AI-powered DevSecOps Platform. Easy Redmine is used by the Kazakh state administration, Bosch, Zentiva, Innogy, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic, Axa, RTL Radio Berlin, Continental and Ogilvy among others. It features separately installable extensions.
in 2017, it was reviewed by iX Special in comparison to GitKraken (previously known as Axosoft) and Agilo for Trac.
PCmag while analyzing Redmine highlights that Easy Redmine enhances the core features of Redmine with a more polished interface and offers proprietary plug-ins for additional functionalities, such as  tools for resource management, financial management, and support for agile methodologies.


== Easy AI ==
Easy AI is an artificial intelligence extension integrated into the Easy Redmine project management suite, offering both cloud-based and on-premises deployment options. It is designed to support organizations in automating tasks and improving project management processes while maintaining data security. Easy AI uses the Llama 3.1 model and provides data control for organizations with strict security requirements. 
The system includes assistants for personal, project, and service workflows, supporting tasks such as text summarization, project planning, and helpdesk ticket management. Easy AI is aligned with ISO 27001 and ISO 27017 standards, providing a tool suitable for managing projects across various industries, including those handling sensitive data or intellectual property.


== License ==
The Easy Redmine website claims that "Easy Redmine is an Open Source software", but its source is neither freely downloadable nor is it licensed under an open-source license according to The Open Source Definition, since the Easy Software Commercial License does not allow free redistribution (among other restrictions).


== References ==