Halo Studios (formerly 343 Industries) is an American video game developer based in Redmond, Washington, part of Xbox Game Studios. Headed by Pierre Hintze, the studio is responsible for the Halo science fiction franchise, and develops Halo projects internally, and in collaboration with other studios. The studio was created in 2007 to oversee the franchise after original Halo developer Bungie regained its independence from Microsoft, and originally named after the character 343 Guilty Spark.
After co-developing downloadable content for Halo: Reach, Bungie's final Halo game, 343 Industries released Halo: Combat Evolved Anniversary and Halo 4, the latter starting the studio's "Reclaimer Saga" of the mainline games, which further encompassed Halo 5: Guardians (2015) and concluded with Halo Infinite in 2021. The studio rebranded in October 2024.


== History ==


=== Formation and early projects ===
Bungie was a video game developer working on their next project when they were acquired by Microsoft in 2000. Their in-development game, Halo: Combat Evolved, turned into a launch title for Microsoft's Xbox console. Bungie and Microsoft's cultures never meshed, and after the release of Halo 2 Bungie began renegotiating for better profit sharing for their next game, Halo 3. These discussions led to Bungie announcing its independence from Microsoft in 2007. While Bungie was still contracted to deliver new Halo games, the rights to the franchise remained with Microsoft. Xbox general manager Bonnie Ross recalled that her colleagues felt Halo was a waning property and looked at contracting an outside company to produce new games; the series's deep backstory and universe appealed to Ross, and she argued for a different approach. Ross' pitch won over Microsoft Game Studios general manager Shane Kim, and she was put in charge of a new internal Halo studio, 343 Industries, named after the Halo character 343 Guilty Spark.
343 Industries started with a staff of roughly a dozen people in late 2007. Bungie staffer Frank O'Connor assisted in the transition, and left Bungie to serve as 343 Industries' franchise director. Ross' vision for Halo also impressed Microsoft art director Kiki Wolfkill, who joined the team as a studio head. During the transition, 343 Industries worked with the company Starlight Runner to compile a centralized story bible for the universe.

In July 2009, 343 Industries announced it was working on a seven-part Halo anime series called Halo Legends. Later that year the studio created Halo Waypoint, a downloadable application that tracks a user's Halo accomplishments. 343 Industries also increased staff for Halo development, recruiting staff from the defunct Pandemic Studios. 343 Industries also collaborated with Certain Affinity on Halo: Reach's map packs. Wanting to mark the occasion of Halo: Combat Evolved's tenth anniversary, 343 Industries contracted Saber Interactive to develop Halo: Combat Evolved Anniversary, which released on November 15, 2011.


=== Reclaimer saga ===
Following Bungie's completion of their last Halo title, Halo: Reach, 343 Industries was eventually given complete control of the Halo franchise including servers and data on March 31, 2012. The studio's development of Halo 4, which began in 2009, was completed in September. It was released on November 6, 2012, as the first title of a new Halo Reclaimer Trilogy which would include at least two more installments over the years. At E3 2013, Microsoft and 343 Industries announced the next "Halo" installment set for release on the Xbox One. Shortly after the announcement, the Reclaimer Trilogy was confirmed by Microsoft Studios corporate vice-president Phil Spencer to be expanded into a Reclaimer Saga. The following year at E3 2014, the official title was revealed as "Halo 5: Guardians" along with plans for its release on October 27, 2015. Microsoft, in a contract with Mega Bloks, is in conjunction with 343 Industries to manufacture a new line of toys and other memorabilia for the upcoming Halo saga. Halo 5: Guardians was released on October 27, 2015, with semi-exclusive content to those who purchased select Mega Bloks sets. 343 Industries has since released free monthly content updates since Halo 5's launch.
At E3 2018, Microsoft Studios and 343 Industries announced the next Halo game, titled Halo Infinite, which was originally scheduled to launch in holiday 2020 for Xbox One and Windows PCs, in addition to being a launch title for the next Xbox console, the Xbox Series X. However, the game was delayed to release in 2021, in part due to the COVID-19 pandemic forcing the 343 staff to switch to remote work. Infinite was developed using 343's in-house Slipspace Engine.


=== Rebranding ===
After Infinite's release, 343 Industries supported the game via updates. On September 12, 2022, Bonnie Ross announced she would step down as studio head. Following her departure, her responsibilities were split into three positions. Pierre Hintze took over as studio head, Bryan Koski became GM of the franchise and Elizabeth Van Wyck took over business and operations. Amid wider layoffs in the tech industry and Microsoft, 343 Industries was heavily affected, and Bloomberg News reported the studio would be making large changes to its development structure going forward.
In October 2024, 343 Industries announced a rebrand as Halo Studios, amid a shift to Unreal Engine 5 for future project development, moving away from Slipspace Engine. A Halo Waypoint blog post in early July 2025 confirmed that Halo Studios would reveal details on their first project in Unreal Engine 5 during that October's Halo World Championships. The studio was subject to internal layoffs coinciding with Microsoft's business reorganizations later that month, with an anonymous former employee interviewed by Engadget citing "tension" that had been arising within the developer regarding unspecified projects that were "recently in crisis." The individual also spoke of Microsoft pivoting Halo development towards collaborating with contracted studios across the United States and Europe, as opposed to individual contractors as 343 Industries relied on, mirroring the development pipelines for other first-person-shooter titles like Call of Duty and Battlefield. Additional personnel were laid off of the studio in 2025 amid wider Microsoft layoffs, with sources reporting to Engadget dissatisfaction and tension at the studio.


== Games overseen ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website