Hubstaff is a time tracking software platform with built-in productivity monitoring, automated payments, and workforce analytics features for remote, hybrid, in-office and field-based teams. It is used by businesses to track employee hours, streamline operations, and analyze team performance across desktop, web, and mobile apps. Founded in 2012 by Dave Nevogt and Jared Brown, Hubstaff today employs a workforce of around 130 people across the world.
Hubstaff was seen as a rising technology company in 2015, when they received a nomination as part of Techpoint’s Mira Awards for The Best of Tech in Indiana. The company also made the Inc. 5000 list in 2018 and 2019. Hubsaff has secured a growth investment from WestView Capital Partners, a Boston-based private equity firm specializing in middle-market growth companies.


== History ==
Nevogt was previously the founder of McCordsville-based Innovative Solutions Inc., while Brown had a background as a developer.
Following the creation of the software with the same name as the company, the outsourcing of freelance work became more common with the development of sites such as Elance and oDesk. Hubstaff considered that the use of their software allowed for entrepreneurs and startup companies to focus on the strategic side of the business, rather than operational tasks. The use of freelance management software became more frequent as web-based startups began to outsource the majority of their operational teams.
Hubstaff were nominees for the Best Tech in Indiana Award in the best Tech Startup of the Year category in 2015.
In April 2020, an article was published on The Wall Street Journal website, discussing how companies were seeing increases in productivity while using the software developed by Hubstaff.
In May 2020, Hubstaff's co-founder Jared Brown appeared on NBC's The Today Show and talked about the role of software developed by the company in supporting businesses in the shift to remote work during the COVID-19 pandemic.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website