KissAnime was an anime-focused file streaming website that hosted links and embedded videos, allowing users to stream or download movies and TV shows illegally for free. It was a sister site to a related manga viewing website, KissManga. KissAnime was described as "one of the world’s biggest streaming anime websites". TorrentFreak reported that the sites had audiences of millions and that, for a time, KissAnime was "the most visited pirate site in the world".


== History ==
In mid-2017 the site was a target of a subpoena by US company Funimation Global Group, which described its actions as aimed at "someone... disseminating infringing content on a MASSIVE scale, for profit."
In December 2018, the site was blocked in Australia. It was also blocked in India in July 2020, along with other pirate streaming and torrent websites, after a decision by the Delhi High Court in favour of the plaintiff, Disney India. The court order provided for "dynamic" blocking meaning that Disney could ask for further bans on websites violating copyrights other than the ones in the order.
The website, as well as KissManga, was shut down on 14 August 2020 (the .com website had been registered in 2012 and a more recent .ru domain in 2016), and it has been suggested this was done due to copyright complaints, and the threat of the new, stricter Japanese laws on online piracy. 


== Reactions ==
The site has been criticized for its copyright infringement and occasionally for advertisements that contained malware, but it has been praised for popularizing anime and manga, and for providing access to content that is not legally available in certain areas, particularly in parts of Europe, Southeast Asia and India. 
Its main site, KissAnime.ru, was shut down on 14 August 2020. One commentator noted that "fans are furious" as "in many countries they really have nowhere to go" for the kind of content that was hosted on the site. Another commentator has described the outcome as both "a major strike to media piracy [and] a blow to the history of anime", noting that the website has also been an archive of rare titles, such as the 1993 original video animation, Battle Angel. Many of the works that have been available on the website can be considered lost, as not only are many titles not distributed legally in many countries, but in some cases, they are only available on physical media, which is subject to degradation over time, and are not possible to legally stream anywhere in the world.


== See also ==
123Movies – Former online illegal movie streaming site network
AniWave – Former anime-focused piracy file streaming site
Limewire – Peer-to-peer file sharing applicationPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Nyaa Torrents – File sharing website focused on East Asian media
Online piracy – Illegal use of digital copyrighted works
Scanlation – Fan translation of comics, often manga
The EmuParadise – Website that hosted video game ROMsPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
The Pirate Bay – Website providing torrent files and magnet links
Warez scene – Organized network of pirate groups


== References ==