LinkedIn released a ranked list of 50 universities in the United States on August 12, 2025, named "The 50 best colleges for long-term career success in the U.S." using the website's own data in its calculations. The primary list focuses on bachelor's degrees, but being a highly business based platform, LinkedIn released separate ranking for MBA programs (general business schools). They also released a ranking of public universities, Liberal arts colleges, and HBCUs.


== 50 Top Colleges in the U.S. ==
The 15 highest ranked colleges on the primary list is as follows: 

While this ranking is focused on undergraduate education, colleges with strong business programs are highly represented on the list. Babson College describes itself as an entrepreneurial leadership college, which can explain why it's in the top ten amongst colleges generally considered far more prestigious. The other surprising inclusion, Bentley University, also describes itself as business focused.
Compared to the U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges Ranking, generally considered the gold standard of college rankings, there are several significant differences in the top 15 besides the inclusion of Babson and Bentley. Three universities in the top ten of U.S. news are not featured in the top fifteen of LinkedIn's list, Johns Hopkins University, University of Chicago, and Yale University. The top fifteen of U.S. News also includes all 8 Ivy League colleges, whereas LinkedIn excludes Columbia University and Yale University as mentioned prior.
Johns Hopkins University at rank #7 is by far the highest ranked university on U.S. News' list that is not featured at all in LinkedIn's top 50. Following it is University of California, Los Angeles at #17, Washington University in St. Louis at #20, Emory University at #24, and University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill at #26.
Here are following entries from the list:


== Top MBA Programs ==
LinkedIn first ranked their favorite MBA programs in 2023 and has updated the list most recently on September 15th, 2025. Rather than a top 50, they chose their 100 top picks for programs. They also elected for the expansive scope of the entire world rather than limiting themselves to American institutions.
Following is the top fifteen highest ranked MBA programs by LinkedIn as of 2025:

Of the famous set of M7 business schools in America, all of them are featured in the top fifteen of this global list with the Booth School of Business being the only one to miss out on the top ten, placing just behind at #11. 
Here is an expanded set of some of the business schools LinkedIn considers as some of the greatest:


== References ==