Monday.com Ltd. (styled in lowercase as monday.com) is an Israeli-based cloud-based platform that allows users to create their own applications and project management software. The product was launched in 2014 and in July 2019, the company raised $150 million, based on a $1.9 billion valuation. The company went public in June 2021 and is based in Tel Aviv, Israel.


== History ==
Monday.com was founded in 2012 by Roy Mann, Eran Kampf and Eran Zinman. 
The company, originally called Dapulse, began as an internal tool developed at SAAS website builder Wix.com to address communication and transparency challenges as Wix rapidly scaled. Recognizing its broader potential, the tool was spun off as a separate startup in 2012, with Wix as its first customer and supporter.
By August 2012, Dapulse raised $1.5 million in seed funding. The product was commercially launched in 2014. In June 2016, the company announced the closing of $7.6M in a Series A round. The round was led by Genesis Partners, with participation from existing backer Entrée Capital.
In April 2017, the company raised $25 million. The round was led by New York–based firm Insight Venture Partners, with participation from existing Series A investors Genesis Partners and Entrée Capital. In November 2017, the company changed its brand name from dapulse to monday.com.
In July 2018, the company raised $50 million in a Series C funding round. The round was led by New York–based growth equity firm, Stripes Group, with participation from existing Series A and B investors, Insight Venture Partners and Entrée Capital. In July 2019, the company announced it had raised $150M in a Series D round, bringing total funding to $234.1M. The round was led by Sapphire Ventures with participation from Hamilton Lane, HarbourVest Partners, ION Crossover Partners, and Vintage Investment Partners.
The funding gave the company a valuation of $1.9B, making it a unicorn. As of 2021, the company reported it was serving over 127,000 customers across over 200 business verticals. In May 2020, the company won the 2020 Webby Award for Productivity in the category Apps, Mobile & Voice. In May 2021, the company filed for a U.S. IPO. The company went public on June 10, 2021.
In January 2025, TheJournal.ie reported that Ireland's Rental Sector Watchdog, the Residential Tenancy Board (RTB) cut ties with the Israeli-based company that provides the software for its internal record-keeping system, following backlash from staff. The TheJournal.ie went onto say, "employees at RTB cited Monday.com’s work with the Israeli government. Monday.com include Benjamin Netanyahu’s government on its website as a case study of its prior work."
In February 2025, monday.com reported record financial results for the fourth quarter and the fiscal year 2024, with a revenue of $268 million, representing a 32% growth compared to the previous year. The company also achieved a record non-GAAP operating profit and a net dollar retention rate of 112%. Additionally, monday.com plans to hire around 600 new employees over the next 12 months and is seeking strategic acquisitions to expand its operations.


== API ==
Version 1 of monday.com's API is a representational state transfer based JSON API capable of handling cross-origin resource sharing (CORS) requests and uses an API Token as authentication.
Version 2 of their API is a GraphQL API that allows users to pull and/or alter data about users, updates, items, boards, and tags.
In June 2020, monday.com released its API to third-party developers. monday.com's open API allows users to build on the platform capabilities. Use cases include custom views, dashboard widgets, automations, and integrations with other work apps.


== Israeli-Palestinian conflict ==
Monday.com has worked with the Israeli government, during the Gaza war. It worked with Benjamin Netanyahu before the Gaza war too.
According to Bloomberg News, about five percent of the company's employees were called up for reserve duty in the Israel Defense Forces after the attacks, while the Israeli business daily Calcalist reported the figure was closer to seven percent. Both outlets noted that monday.com expanded its mental-health services and created reintegration tools for returning reservists.
In October 2023, Forbes reported that monday.com’s software was being used by volunteer groups and civil organizations to coordinate humanitarian relief efforts and logistics following the attacks. The article described monday.com as one of several Israeli tech platforms that quickly adapted their tools to support volunteer coordination during the crisis.
According to Forbes, "around 200 local employees volunteered from monday.com’s Israel office in the first week after the attacks. They helped organize the purchase of floral wreaths for funerals, coordinated donations of supplies and supported other groups running their projects using monday.com’s software in conjunction with monday.com’s non-profit arm, Digital Lift."


== See also ==
Comparison of project management software
List of collaborative software


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Business data for Monday.com Ltd.: