Semrush Holdings, Inc. is an American public company that has a SaaS platform known as Semrush. The platform is used for keyword research, competitive analysis, site audits, backlink tracking, domain authority tracking, and online visibility insights. The keyword research tool provides various data points on each keyword. The platform also collects information about online keywords gathered from Google and Bing search engines. More recently, Semrush has integrated artificial intelligence technologies aimed at enhancing visibility within AI-driven search environments. It was released by Boston-based company Semrush Inc, founded by Oleg Shchegolev and Dmitri Melnikov.
As of 2025, the company has 1000+ employees and offices in Barcelona, Belgrade, Berlin, Yerevan, Limassol, Prague, Warsaw, Amsterdam, Boston, and Dallas. It went public in March 2021 and trades on NYSE: SEMR.


== History ==
Semrush was first released as Seodigger before becoming an extension of Firefox, then renamed SeoQuake Company in 2007, before landing on Semrush (the acronym SEM stands for Search engine marketing). 
In April 2018, the company received $40 million in funding as part of a financing transaction co-led by venture capital firms Greycroft, E.ventures and Siguler Guff, in preparation for its expansion into various platforms of research, including those owned by Amazon, Microsoft, and Baidu.
In December 2020, the company rebranded with a new visual identity, updating its name from "SEMrush" to "Semrush".
In March 2021, Semrush had an initial public offering and went public on NYSE under the symbol NYSE: SEMR. The S-1 form revealed that the company had sales of $213 million and more than 82,000 customers.
Semrush's founders are Russian, and relocated to the US in 2017. In response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine in 2022, the company ceased all operations in Russia and offered relocation to Russian-based staff to other European countries.
In June 2022, the company launched a beta tool for content generation called Content Outline Builder. The tool will suggest ideas for article writing and blog posts. Semrush also announced on June 27, 2022, that their Backlinks insights data is now integrated with SurferSEO, a marketing tool focused on content creation.
In February 2023, Semrush announced an integration with Wix.com, enabling Wix users to access Semrush’s SEO tools directly through the Wix platform.
In March 2024, Semrush acquired the assets of Datos, a digital marketing company, with the aim of integrating its audience intelligence tools into the Semrush platform. 
In June 2024, Semrush launched "Semrush Enterprise", an AI-driven platform to streamline digital marketing for large businesses.
In July 2024, Semrush acquired Ryte, a German SaaS company specializing in website quality management and SEO optimization.
In March 2025, Bill R. Wagner became CEO of Semrush, succeeding co-founder Oleg Shchegolev, who transitioned to the role of Chief Technology Officer (CTO). Wagner is the former CEO of GoTo Group. In March 2025, Semrush introduced "Semrush Enterprise AIO", an enterprise platform that monitors, manages, and optimizes brand presence across AI-powered search platforms. 
In September 2025, Semrush announced it was intensifying its focus on artificial intelligence. Speaking at the Goldman Sachs Technology Conference, Semrush executives described AI as a "generational shift", emphasizing the role of AI-powered tools within the Semrush platform. Also in 2025, Semrush released AI Visibility Toolkit and Enterprise AIO, which monitor how entities are referenced and represented within responses generated by large language model-based answer engines.
In November 2025, Adobe Inc. announced its agreement to acquire Semrush for $1.9 billion.


== Acquisitions ==
Acquisitions made by Semrush include:

2022 – Backlinko
2022 – Kompyte, an intelligence and sales platform
2023 – Traffic Think Tank, a SEO community
2024 – Third Door Media, the publisher of Search Engine Land
2024 – Brand24, a brand monitoring platform
2024 – Ryte, for SEO and user experience
2024 – Datos, for data analytics
2024 – Exploding Topics, a data-driven trend discovery platform


== References ==