Serendipity is a blog and web-based content management system written in PHP and available under a BSD license. It supports PostgreSQL, MySQL, SQLite database backends, the Smarty template engine, and a plugin architecture for user contributed modifications.

Serendipity is available through a number of "one-click install" services such as Installatron.


== Features ==
Serendipity's plugin architecture allows users to modify both the appearance of the blog and its features.
Serendipity's SPARTACUS plugin automatically checks the central repository for plugins/templates upgrades and new functionality whenever a user checks the list. Users can install more than 120 plugins.

WYSIWYG and HTML editing
Built-in media database, can add media from URL or local file
Multiple authors, configurable permission/usergroup system
Threaded comments, nested categories, post to multiple categories
Multiple languages (internationalization)
Online plugin and template repository for easy plug-and-play installation
Drag-and-drop sidebar plugins organization
Category-based sub-blogs
Static Pages
Podcasting
RSS planet/aggregator
Spam blocking
Tag support
One-click upgrading from any version
Can be embedded into your existing web pages
Standards-compliant templating through Smarty
Remote blogging via XML-RPC
BSD-style licensing
Multiple Database support (SQLite, PostgreSQL, MySQL, MySQLi)
Shared installations can power multiple blogs from just one codebase
Native import from earlier blog applications (WordPress, Textpattern, Moveable Type, bblog, etc.)
Search engine-friendly permalink structure
TrackBack and Pingback
default template for frontend and backend have responsive web design


== History ==
The Serendipity project was started by Jannis Hermanns in the winter of 2002, then still called jBlog. Due to a naming conflict with an existing blog publishing system, Sterling Hughes suggested the name serendipity. This suggestion is based on an Essay by Sam Ruby. The short form s9y stems from abbreviations such as i18n for internationalization where the number represents the amount of omitted letters. Today the project is maintained by Garvin Hicking.


== Book ==

The first book about Serendipity was published in German by OpenSourcePress: Serendipity - Individuelle Weblogs für Einsteiger und Profis.
  The publisher donated the book's copyright to the Serendipity project, who has released it under a CC-BY-NC-SA license and made a GitHub repository available online.


== See also ==

Comparison of content management systems


== References ==