Sitejabber is an AI-enabled platform that allows businesses and buyers to interact through online reviews. Sitejabber was founded in 2007 in San Francisco, California and has been described as "the Yelp for websites and online businesses".
Sitejabber rebranded the reputation management platform part of its service in 2023, under the name Jabio.


== History ==
According to the Sitejabber blog, the service was started in 2007 by Jeremy Gin, Rodney Gin and Michael Lai in an effort to reduce online fraud and improve online transparency. Sitejabber was originally developed with a grant from the National Science Foundation.
In 2010, Sitejabber partnered with LegitScript to identify fraudulent prescription drug websites and help users avoid them. Sitejabber also formed a similar partnership with Health On Net (HON) to help identify trustworthy health and medical websites.
Sitejabber released an official Google Chrome extension in 2015.
Sitejabber’s services have been covered in publications such The New York Times,  MarketWatch, MSN Money,The Atlantic, Wall Street Journal and The Chicago Tribune.
Sitejabber is a certified Google Reviews partner. 


== Jabio ==
In 2023, Sitejabber relaunched its review management platform under a new name, Jabio. Sitejabber states that its technology allows brands to manage their reputation by collecting, monitoring, and distributing reviews. The company states that this update helps distinguish the Jabio business platform from the Sitejabber site.
The Jabio platform allows businesses to source reviews, manage feedback, and use reviews for their online marketing - including publishing or facilitating reviews across destinations including Google Seller Ratings, BBB, and other customer review websites.
In addition, both B2C and B2B consumers create Sitejabber accounts to rate and review online businesses, providing an overall star-rating as well as evaluating criteria such as service, value, shipping, returns, and quality. Sitejabber is a platform where users can share their experiences and insights about various businesses. These features are designed to help buyers make informed purchasing decisions while helping them avoid deceptive websites.
Sitejabber has been recognized by PC Magazine and CNN.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website