Techreport (formerly stylized "The Tech Report") is one of the oldest hardware, news, and tech review sites. 
Techreport specializes in hardware news, which it publishes on a weekly basis. It used to produce quarterly system build guides at various price points, and occasional price vs. performance scatter plots. 
It has an online community and used to have an active podcast. Some of the site's investigative articles regarding hardware benchmarking have been cited by other reputable technology news sites like Anandtech and PC World.
The site went through an ownership change and major redesign in the middle of 2019, moving away from unrelated topics and re-focusing the content strategy on hardware, PC news, and technology developments. 
The Techreport is still active and publishes news on a weekly basis.


== History ==
Tech Report was founded by Scott Wasson, a Harvard Divinity School graduate, and Andy Brown. Both started by writing at Ars Technica in 1998. The two later decided to launch their website. The site eventually grew into a business enterprise with multiple full-time staff members.
Tech Report was originally located at tech-report.com in 1999. The site was moved to techreport.com in 2003.
On August 20, 2007, a beta for a new site design was posted in the forums for review by the user community. It was later moved to live.
Launching on January 1, 2011, the new site design, TR 3.0, rolled out. It offered a completely new layout and two user-switchable colors, blue and white, along with a reduced mobile device format.
On December 2, 2015, Scott Wasson, the founder and Editor-In-Chief stepped down as he accepted a role in AMD's graphics division. Wasson subsequently sold the company in March 2018 to Adam Eiberger, the Tech Report's business manager.
On December 21, 2018 Jeff Kampman stepped down as Editor-In-Chief. The site was then sold to investors John Rampton and John Rall, and Renee Johnson took over as Editor-in-Chief.
On July 7, 2019, coinciding with the release of AMD's Ryzen 3 CPUs and Navi GPUs, a site redesign was launched, moving from the Tech Report's former custom CMS and functionality to a WordPress template. On July 9, Johnson posted an introduction to the design. The new redesign was met with criticism from the users. In August of the same year, TechReport's senior editing team experienced a series of changes, which was also evident in a change in direction in terms of the focus of the site, no longer covering hardware reviews and system guides to the same extent.


== AMD TLB bug investigation ==
TechReport was one of the first sites in 2007 to document and benchmark the flaw in the translation lookaside buffer (TLB) of AMD Phenom CPUs. Despite claims by AMD that the initial BIOS fix would only result in 10% performance decrease, benchmarks by TechReport have revealed that the performance impact by the initial BIOS fix was much more severe, up to nearly 20% on average, with some applications such as Firefox experiencing performance decrease of 57% in tests. They were also the first one to notify about AMD stopping the shipment of processors due to this bug.


== Video game and GPU performance benchmarking research ==
On September 8, 2011, Scott Wasson posted an article titled "Inside the Second: A New Look at Game Benchmarking." This showed gamers that frames per second (FPS) are not the only thing that matters in "smooth" gameplay, but frame latency has a big part. This innovative benchmarking method was later mentioned and acknowledged by other publications such as Anandtech, which described this method as "a revolution in the 3D game benchmarking scene" and Overclockers.


== SSD Endurance Experiment ==
In 2013, TechReport started an experiment using several SSD drives to determine how many writes they can endure. This test lasted for more than 18 months before all drives used in this test failed, enduring much larger amount of written data than rated by manufacturers themselves, and even prompting one of the manufacturers, Samsung, to release a humorous music video dedicated to this test.


== Site Structure ==


=== Main Page ===
A large portion of the main page was dedicated to "News" and "Blog" entries. Among the news entries were "Shortbread" posts which offered a summary breakdown of reviews and news offered by other sites. Featured articles were often reviews of newly released PC hardware that had been tested by the site's editors and judged on several metrics including performance and value compared to other available hardware. 


=== Podcast ===
Adapting to the general trend of more content for digest, The Tech Report launched its podcast on February 9, 2008, hosted by Jordan Drake. While the schedule has varied it provides a casual but quite in-depth look back at the topics that made news from a panel of the site staff. After 2015 episodes were released irregularly, frequently discussing the release of a new microarchitecture with David Kanter of Real World Technologies. The last episode was made in January 2018.


=== Community and Forum ===
Tech Report has a phpBB-styled forum that is unrestricted in read-only form and open to the public for contribution via simple registration. The forum is primarily structured around computer technology and related topics, but debates also range from politics and religion in the "opt-in only" R&P forum to general random chatter in the Back Porch. Contributors to the website also have access to a restricted forum called the Smoky Back Room. Registered users may respond to news topics and other entries posted on the front page in an isolated threaded comments section that automatically attaches to each new entry. Although access to the main page comments is linked to the user database, the discussions are logged separately from the forum area of the site and are not counted toward the user forum statistics.
As of 2023, Techreport forums have been taken offline due to outdated forum software.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website