Windows Installer XML Toolset (WiX, pronounced "wicks") is a free software toolset that builds Windows Installer packages from XML. It consists of a command-line environment that developers may integrate into their build processes to build MSI and MSM packages. WiX was the first Microsoft project to be released under an open-source license, the Common Public License. It was also the first Microsoft project to be hosted on an external website.
After its release in 2004, Microsoft has used WiX to package Office 2007, SQL Server 2005, Visual Studio 2005/2008, and other products.
WiX includes Votive, a Visual Studio add-in that allows creating and building WiX setup projects using the Visual Studio IDE. Votive supports syntax highlighting and IntelliSense for .wxs source files and adds a WiX setup project type .wixproj to Visual Studio.


== History ==
WiX was the first Microsoft project to be released under an open-source license, the Common Public License. Initially hosted on SourceForge, it was also the first Microsoft project to be hosted externally.
On June 6, 2010, WiX moved from SourceForge to CodePlex. On August 14, 2012, Microsoft transferred the WiX copyright to the Microsoft-sponsored Outercurve Foundation. At the same time, the license was changed from the Common Public License to the Microsoft Reciprocal License. On May 4, 2016, WiX was transferred to the .NET Foundation.
Since Visual Studio 2012, the traditional setup project type has been removed from Visual Studio (available only as an extension since Visual Studio 2013). WiX is a recommended alternative.


== Functions ==
WiX is a toolset designed to build Windows Installer (.msi) packages using the command line. It comes with the following tools:

Candle: compiles source files into object files
Light: combines object files into a .msi file
Lit: creates libraries that can be linked by Light.exe
Dark: decompiles a .msi file into WiX code
Heat: creates a WiX source file
Pyro: creates Patch files (.msp) without needing the Windows Installer SDK
Burn: coordinates dependency installer


== See also ==

List of installation software
Shared Source Initiative


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Interview with Rob Mensching of Microsoft's WiX Project