George Noel Gittoes,  (born 7 December 1949) is an Australian artist, documentary filmmaker, photographer, and writer. He is known for capturing images of Australian peacekeepers in several conflict zones, and has become a strong advocate for peace. He was a co-founder of Yellow House Artist Collective in Sydney in 1969, and in 2011 opened Yellow House Jalalabad in Afghanistan. His work is held in major galleries around Australia, including the National Gallery in Canberra. His  first wife, Gabrielle Dalton, collaborated as producer on many of his early films, while his second wife, Hellen Rose, has been collaborating with him on many of his films made in conflict zones since around 2011. His most recent films have been filmed in Ukraine, since the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022. 


== Early life and education ==
George Noel Gittoes was born in Sydney, New South Wales, on 7 December 1949, the son of potter Joy Gittoes.
He grew up in Rockdale, New South Wales, where he would stage puppet shows in his backyard. When they became popular, he started charging for them, donating the proceeds to the Red Cross.
He attended Bexley Public School and then Kogarah High School, where he had an unhappy time before transferring to Kingsgrove North High School for his final two years. His family had moved to Bardwell Park. Gittoes became interested in Islamic cultures at school, and under his influence, his art class specialised in Islamic art for the first NSW Higher School Certificate in 1967.
He studied fine arts at the University of Sydney in 1968, having enrolled for an arts/law degree, but dropped out before completing first year, after finding the other subjects boring. Inspired by a talk given by Clement Greenberg, he travelled to New York City, where he spent some time at the Art Students League of New York, working with African American painter Joseph Delaney. He also met Andy Warhol. 


== Career ==


=== Overview ===
Gittoes is a painter, water-colourist, drawer, performance artist, filmmaker, photographer, printmaker, and sculptor. According to Mitchell Fine Art, he has been described as a pop artist, a figurative artist, a modernist, and a post-modernist, but his work is all related to documenting. Gittoes' early travels include: US, 1968-69; UK, Europe, and US, 1984; Nicaragua, 1986; Philippines 1989; Africa and Asia 1993-95. He earned the designation "unofficial war artist", having travelled under the auspices of the Australian Defence Force, usually with and their protection and some assistance from them, but with no constraints on his work.
Gittoes and his first wife Gabrielle Dalton, who often acted as producer, collaborated on many films made in Australia. 
Gittoes and his second wife Hellen Rose, a musician and performance artist, have become well known for making anti-war art together since around 2011. It has seen them travel to several war zones in countries such as Pakistan, Afghanistan, Cambodia, Somalia, and Ukraine, where they travelled to make a documentary film about local artists. Gittoes produces, directs, and shoots the films, while Rose co-produces, acts, and creates the soundtracks. 


=== Australia ===
Returning to Australia after his spell in New York, in 1969 Gittoes co-founded the Yellow House at Potts Point with other artists including Martin Sharp and Albie Thoms, where Gittoes performed puppet shows. Later, in 2011 he relocated to Afghanistan and opened a Yellow House in Jalalabad, which focused on filmmaking, but was also a centre for the creative arts. 
In 1971 he moved to Bundeena, New South Wales, where he created art studios and lived until 2008. He painted bush scenery and created holograms, and also started working with some local Aboriginal communities and learning about Aboriginal culture. Here he made his first film  paintings, performances, holograms and a film composed of abstract images, The Rainbow Way in 1976, partly based on the creation myth of the Rainbow Serpent. Art historian Gabrielle Dalton collaborated with him on the film, and they later married. Martin Wesley-Smith composed music for the film. Dalton, Wesley-Smith, Ian Fredericks, and Gittoes together created a series of multi-media shows at Wattamolla lagoon between 1979 and 1981, sometimes accompanied by live dancers. Gittoes and Dalton made a film called Wattamolla that was shown at the International Dance Film and Videotape Festival and Conference in New York in June 1981.
He made his first documentary film, Tracks of the Rainbow, for ABC Television in 1982. This was about a group of Aboriginal children from New South Wales travelling north to meet with tribal elders from Mornington Island.  The first of a trilogy called The Territory Trilogy, Warriors and Lawmen (1984), showed the conflict between Aboriginal people and the white legal system. The film covers two criminal cases, one from 1968 and one from 1983, in the Northern Territory. Unbroken Spirit and Frontier Women followed in 1985. Dalton produced Warriors and Lawmen, which she continued to do for many of his following films. 


=== Conflict zones ===
In 1986 Gittoes went to Nicaragua to make another war film, The Bullets of the Poets, exploring the connection between war and poetry, leading to a long interest in the intersection of art, war, and culture in conflict.
The Australian War Memorial commissioned him to take photographs in the conflicts in Cambodia in 1992 and Somalia in 1993, accompanying the Australian soldiers working as part of the UN peacekeeping force.
He travelled to Rwanda after the 1994 Rwandan genocide, accompanying the UN Assistance Mission for Rwanda. Making a second trip in 1995, he witnessed the aftermath of a massacre by the Rwandan forces on 22 April 1995 at Kibeho. He took photographs and made pencil drawings of what he saw, and helped to carry wounded victims. This led him to continue to document people's lives in areas of conflict, believing that "art can make a difference. It's art without borders".
Gittoes made Soundtrack to War (2004) after two long stays in Baghdad. The film was based on interviews with young American soldiers about what music they played as they burnt and bombed the city and the impact of death on them. He also recorded music of Baghdad residents, as well as music created by African American soldiers, who made up most of the force there. In 2005, Soundtrack to War screened at the Sydney and Berlin Film Festivals, the Museum of Modern Art in New York, Museum of Contemporary Art in Sydney, as well as in cinemas in Europe, the US, and Australia. Seventeen scenes in Soundtrack were used by Michael Moore used 17 scenes from Gittoes' film in his 2004 film Fahrenheit 9/11. 
His 2006 film Rampage is focused on the Miami subculture of a group of African American soldiers he had met in Iraq. It was screened at the Berlin, Sydney, Vancouver, and Montreal World Film Festivals ahead of cinema release Australia, the UK, and the US. Critic Margaret Pomeranz described Rampage as "intensely human, vulnerable, and insightful". 
In 2007 he went to the North-West Frontier Province of Pakistan to make the third of a trilogy of films created as a response to the "war on terror", using this term as the series title. The first version of the film, titled The Miscreants, was screened at the 2008 Sydney Underground Film Festival. The final version, titled The Miscreants of Taliwood, was screened at the Telluride Film Festival in 2009, followed by a cinema release.
In July 2009, Gittoes went to live in Berlin, Germany.
In 2011, he relocated to Jalalabad, Afghanistan, with his wife Hellen Rose, and established Yellow House Jalalabad (YHJ). Two films were made there: Love City Jalalabad (2013) and Snow Monkey (2015).
In 2018 he made White Light, about violence in Chicago, a feature documentary about the people involved in gun violence in Chicago, which was screened on ABC Television. No Bad Guys (2021), a sequel to White Light, is also about gun and gang violence in Chicago, particularly on May Block. It follows the lives of both the perpetrators and the bereaved families of the victims. Three of the subjects of the film were killed during the making of the film, which started filming in 2018, shot by Gettoes, Waqar Alam, and Hellen Rose, who was also responsible for the music and production. No Bad Guys was screened at the Melbourne International Documentary Festival, where it won Best Australian Director; Bridge of Peace Film Festival, where it won Best Documentary; and at the Sydney Underground Film Festival.


==== Ukraine ====
Gittoes and Rose went to Ukraine soon after the Russian invasion in 2022, and filmed there over three and a half years during the subsequent war in Ukraine. Basing themselves in Kyiv, they were assisted in their work by a local woman, Kate Parunova.  Gittoes also created many artworks, and the couple collaborated with Ukrainian artist Ave Libertatemaveamor on new works, which were later shown in an exhibition titled George Gittoes: Ukraine Guernica at the Hazelhurst Arts Centre in Sydney. In 2022, Gittoes and Libertatemaveamor collaborated to produce a huge mural, Kiss of Death, on the outside wall of the Irpin House of Culture in Irpin, near Kyiv. The kiss refers to the portrayal of Putin "as a hideous insect-like creature clumsily kissing his contortionist lover, grossly 'feeding off each other'". The two artists also created a graphic novel of the same title in 2024.
In the film Ukraine Guernica: Art Not War, events in Ukraine are linked to Gittoes' and Rose's ongoing Yellow House Jalalabad, a creative centre and art school. The film shows many atrocities of the war, including the bombing of the House of Culture in Irpin, as Russia tries to deny that there is a distinct Ukrainian culture. Despite its gutting, artists continue to give performances and exhibitions, to show that their spirits cannot be destroyed. Gittoes and Rose have noted many similarities between Ukraine and Australia.  The film opened the Sydney Underground Film Festival on 6 September 2023, and also screened at Melbourne International Film Festival; Screenwave International Film Festival in Coffs Harbour, NSW; and Salem Film Fest in Salem, Massachusetts. It also screened in competition in the Asia Pacific Screen Awards, won an award at Oniros Film Awards in New York, and was a finalist in the Bridge of Peace Awards in 2023.
Humanity in Danger opens with Picasso's famous anti-war painting, Guernica, and was screened widely in Ukraine in 2024/5. Its official release date is 27 August 2025.


=== Yellow House Jalalabad ===
Gittoes and Rose moved to Afghanistan in 2011 and established Yellow House Jalalabad (YHJ), where they made two films: Love City Jalalabad (2013) and Snow Monkey (2015). Rose described the town as "a place lost in time due to thirty years of war and very little to do with the outside world". 
Rose had to wear a burqa when she went outside in Jalalabad. She created an underground studio in the building's bomb shelter, so that women's singing and dancing could not been seen or heard outside, dubbed "the Magic Room" She ran film and editing workshops for young women, the "Women's Team", and created a series of phantasmagorical works, which were photographed by Gittoes. She tried to give the women a sense of "inner freedom", playing theatre sports and teaching them meditation. American performance artist Carolee Schneemann met Gittoes and Rose, and admired their work at YHJ. 
Gittoes and Rose were planning to return to Jalalabad in August 2021 to continue their work there, and to make a film on the withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan. However, after the Taliban took power in Afghanistan and the Yellow House Jalalabad creative community was threatened, it relocated to Peshawar, in the Tribal Belt of Pakistan. This "Yellow House in exile" was named the Yellow Submarine, and serves as a sanctuary for the artists until such time as it is safe to return to Jalalabad.


=== Miscellaneous art works ===
In 2014, Gittoes was invited by Julian Assange to the Ecuadorean Embassy in London where Assange was staying. He did three small portraits of Assange titled As Game As – Ecuador Embassy, saying that he saw Assange as a kind of "Wild Colonial Boy like Ned Kelly". He entered one of the portraits into the 2017 Archibald Prize, where he had previously been a finalist in 1991, 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1997. A second portrait of Assange was entered into the Doug Moran National Portrait Prize. 


== Recognition and honours ==
In the 1990s, Gittoes was invited to speak in the US and Germany on many occasions, and had a residency at the University of Michigan. 
In 1992 he won the Blake Prize, for his work Ancient Prayer, and again in 1995 for The Preacher.
In 1993 he was awarded the Wynne Prize for Open Cut, a painting of an old  colliery in Queensland.
In 1997 Gittoes' contribution to Australia was recognised by the award of Member of the Order of Australia, "for service to art and international relations as an artist and photographer portraying the effects on the environment of war, international disasters and heavy industry".
In 2001, he was awarded the Centenary Medal, "for service as an internationally renowned artist".
In 2009, he was given an honorary doctorate in Letters by the University of New South Wales.
In 2011, Gittoes and Rose were invited to speak at the World Conference on Artistic Freedom of Expression in Oslo, Norway, about the Yellow House Jalalabad. 
Gittoes twice received the Bassel Shehade Award for Social Justice from the Syracuse International Film Festival — in October 2013 for Snow Monkey (2015), and in 2018/9 for White Light).
Gittoes and Rose received the NSW Premiers Award in 2014 jointly for their Services to the Community, recognising the couples co founding of the Yellow House Jalalabad in Afghanistan and the Rockdale Yellow House in Arncliffe, New South Wales.
Gittoes was awarded the 2015 Sydney Peace Prize, in November 2025, for "exposing injustice for over 45 years as a humanist artist, activist and filmmaker, for his courage to witness and confront violence in the war zones of the world, for enlisting the arts to subdue aggression and for enlivening the creative spirit to promote tolerance, respect and peace with justice".
In 2019, a chapter about Gittoes, as well as many illustrations of his work, were included in the Australian War Memorial publication Control: Stories of Australian peacekeeping and humanitarian operations.
In 2021, Rose featured in Artist Profile arts magazine.
In 2025 Gittoes was presented with a Lifetime Achievement award by the Sydney Underground Film Festival.
Gittoes received honorary membership to the Australian Peacekeeper and Peacemaker Veterans' Association Inc., which holds a large archive of his photographs.
His puppet theatre made for Yellow House in 1971 was recreated for display in the Powerhouse Museum in Sydney.
Several of his films have been made available on SBS On Demand.


=== Film awards ===
2021: Best Australian Director, Melbourne International Documentary Festival, for No Bad Guys
2021: Best Documentary, Bridge of Peace Film Festival, for No Bad Guys


== Personal life ==
Gittoes'  younger sister, Pamela Griffiths (born 1943), is also an artist.
Gettoes first married art historian Gabrielle Dalton, who produced many of his early films, and later Hellen Rose, who has collaborated on most of his later films.
Rose, a radical feminist performance artist, singer, and actor, grew up in Wollongong. She earned a Bachelor of Visual Arts in 1997 at the University of Sydney, followed by a bachelor's degree and then a master's in teaching in 2001. In the 1990s, she worked with digital artist Linda Dement, co-creating an interactive CD-ROM called In My Gash in 1999. 
Rose first met Gittoes in 1991, when she was 23, living as a squatter in the Gunnery building in Sydney, and he was in his 30s and married. They re-met later when Gittoes had separated from his wife, and they got together in 2007. She accompanied him to Ayubia, Pakistan in 2010, after turning up at the airport unannounced, and did much work with women in Yellow House Jalalabad. They bought their first home together in Werri Beach, NSW, in 2016, and married at their home in 2019.
She wrote that she has seen herself as a professional singer since she was 14 years old, and during the COVID-19 pandemic turned to classical singing again. During the COVID-19 lockdowns in NSW in 2020, Rose created a performance piece based on her work in Afghanistan called The Haunted Burqa Manifesto, and made a short film of it. In 2021, she created a Riot grrrl band called Soul Crime, which sang in multiple indigenous languages and in many different styles from around the world. They created a show to perform at festivals around the world as well as art performance venues such as the Oxford Art Factory for the 2022 Sydney Festival. 


== Exhibitions ==


=== Solo exhibitions ===
George Gittoes - Heavy industry, Wollongong City Gallery (8 May 1992 – 21 June 1992)
George Gittoes: World Diary, multiple venues in NSW and Queensland (23 November 2000 – 8 July 2001)
Witness to War, Station Museum of Contemporary Art, Houston, Texas (April 2011)
White Light, Mitchell Fine Art, Brisbane (2019)
George Gittoes: Ukraine Guernica, including the film Ukrainistan Artist War, Hazelhurst Arts Centre, southern Sydney (30 April – 23 June 2024); then at Deakin University Art Gallery (July – August 2024)


=== Group exhibitions ===
The print, the press, the artist and the printer ... Limited Editions and Artists' Books from Art Presses of the ACT, Drill Hall Gallery [ANU] (1 October 1994 – 1 October 1994)
The Counihan connection: Eight contemporary artists respond to the work of Noel Counihan, Counihan Gallery. (9 October 2009 – 8 November 2009)
Brummels: Australia's first gallery of photography, Monash Gallery of Art (22 October 2011 – 22 January 2012)


== Collections ==
As of December 2025, the National Gallery of Australia holds 185 works by Gittoes.
Gittoes' 1971 etching with aquatint, The Hotel Kennedy Suite is held by the Art Gallery of Western Australia. It was gifted by Gittoes under the Commonwealth Government's Cultural Gifts Program in 2016.
Other galleries holding his work include:

Art Gallery of New South Wales
Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory
Powerhouse Museum
Queensland Art Gallery


== Filmography ==
Rainbow Way  (1976)
Refined Fire (1978)
Wattamolla (1981)
Unfound Land (1983)
Tracks of the Rainbow (1982)
Territory Trilogy:
Warriors and Lawmen (1984)
Unbroken Spirit (1985)
Frontier women (1985)
Visions in the making (1987)
Bullets of the poets (1987)
War on Terror trilogy:
Soundtrack to War (2005); some scenes used in Michael Moore's film Fahrenheit 9/11 in the same year
Rampage (2006)
The Miscreants of Taliwood (2009)
Love City, Jalalabad (2013)
Snow Monkey (2015)
White Light (2018)
No Bad Guys (2021)
Ukrainistan Artist War (2022?)
Ukraine Guernica: Art Not War (2023)
Yellow House Afghanistan (2024-5)
Humanity in Danger  (2024-5)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
War diaries of George Gittoes at that State Library of NSW
"Spotlight on the ghetto for Gittoes". NZ Herald. 9 March 2007. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021.
Lifelounge magazine interview with Gittoes (2007)
"In Conversation with George Gittoes". The Brooklyn Rail. 26 August 2024.
Brooklyn Rail In Conversation George Gittoes
Pacifica Radio interview with George Gittoes on Art, Media and War (2011)


== External links ==

Official website
George Gittoes at IMDb
Bec Mac (artist Rebecca McIntosh) talks to George Gittoes about his work from Southside Chicago, on exhibition, and his film White Light, 4 October 2019 (video, 16 mins). Part of Mac's Popsart series, held by State Library Queensland and available online.
Focus on: George Gittoes - Films on SBS on Demand (as of December 2025)