Amaya Elizabeth Espinal (born November 9, 1999) also known by the nickname "Amaya Papaya", is an American reality television personality. She appeared on the Peacock reality show Love Island USA in 2025, winning the season alongside Bryan Arenales. They are the first Latino couple to win in the franchise's history.


== Early life and career ==
Espinal was born on November 9, 1999, in New York City, New York. She is of Dominican descent, and is the first generation in her family to be born in the United States. She became a licensed cardiac registered nurse in December 2021 and worked at a hospital in New York prior to her appearance on Love Island.


== Career ==
Espinal entered the Love Island villa as a bombshell in episode 4 of the seventh season. She stood out for her humor, authenticity, and iconic one-liners, slowly but surely becoming a fan favorite and the season's breakout star. Some media outlets and fans began referring to Espinal as the "people's princess." Various clips of her impromptu singing, often while alone in the makeup room, quickly went viral. In one widely circulated moment, she sang, "I never said I was perfect. I never said I didn't have any flaws." As of July 2025, the phrase appears as an animated banner when users search "Amaya Papaya" on Google, accompanied by papaya emojis raining down on the page. A Google spokesperson confirmed the feature was added in response to the popularity of the moment. Throughout the season, she explored connections with Ace Greene, Austin Shepherd, and Zak Srakaew.
During the "Stand on Business" challenge in episode 26, Espinal responded to criticism from her former connections — who claimed she cried "more than needed" and came on too strong — with remarks such as "God forbid I'm a sensitive gangsta," and “I’m just not your cup of tea to be drinkin’, so don’t f—ing drink it.” Bryan Arenales, who at the time was coupled up with Andreina Santos, defended Espinal explaining that being affectionate is a common aspect of Latino culture and that terms of endearment such as "babe," "mi amor," and "mi vida" are frequently used. Espinal and Arenales later coupled up and eventually won the seventh season, taking home the $100,000 prize together. The pair have stated their intention to donate a portion of the winnings to charity.
In July 2025, Espinal signed with Gersh and Untitled Entertainment for representation in all areas.
In August 2025, Espinal announced via social media that her and Bryan Arenales are no longer together due to their different visions of their future and journey together.


== Filmography ==


== References ==