Charles John Harder (born November 9, 1969) is an American lawyer at the law firm Harder LLP based in Los Angeles, California.


== Early career and education ==
Harder graduated from the University of California, Santa Cruz with a bachelor's degree in 1991. He earned a juris doctor degree from Loyola Law School in Los Angeles in 1996. After completing law school, Harder served as a law clerk to U.S. District Judge A. Andrew Hauk in Los Angeles.


== Notable cases ==
Harder is best known for representing Hulk Hogan (real name Terry Bollea) in the Bollea v. Gawker case.
In 2007, Harder represented video game publisher Ubisoft in a one-week arbitration trial, defeating an $11 million claim by a German video game producer.
Between 2009 and 2016, Harder represented a number of celebrities over misappropriation of their names and likeness, including Sandra Bullock, George Clooney, Bradley Cooper, Jude Law, Mandy Moore, Liam Neeson, Julia Roberts and Reese Witherspoon. Harder also won ICANN arbitrations for Sandra Bullock, Cameron Diaz, Kate Hudson, and Sigourney Weaver.
In 2011, Harder won an $18 million verdict for Cecchi Gori Pictures and defeated a multi-million dollar counter-claim after a four-week trial in Los Angeles state court.
In 2017–18, Harder represented Ivan Aguilera, the heir of Mexican pop icon Juan Gabriel, against Univision and Telemundo in a $100 million defamation suit.
In 2017, on behalf of Harvey Weinstein, Harder threatened to sue the New York Times after the Times published a story about Weinstein's alleged harassment. The lawsuit was not filed, and Harder withdrew from representation of Weinstein the following week.
In 2017, Harder represented First Lady Melania Trump in a defamation case against the Daily Mail, which resulted in a $2.9 million settlement payment to Trump, and a public retraction and apology by the Daily Mail to her. In 2018, he also represented President Donald Trump in legal demand letters sent to political consultant/media executive Steve Bannon and author Michael Wolff. Harder also represented Jared Kushner in connection with a Vanity Fair article covering the 2017 Special Counsel investigation. He represented the Trump campaign in a legal action taken against Omarosa Manigault Newman following the publication of her book, Unhinged.
In 2018, Harder represented Trump in a defamation lawsuit filed by Stormy Daniels (real name Stephanie Clifford).  On October 15, 2018, the U.S. District Court granted an anti-SLAPP motion filed by Harder, dismissing the lawsuit with prejudice and awarding Trump reimbursement of his attorneys fees against Stormy Daniels. On December 11, 2018, the court ordered Stormy Daniels to pay Trump 75% reimbursement of his attorneys fees or $292,052.33, plus a $1000 sanction on Stormy Daniels as well. "The court’s order," Harder said, "along with the court’s prior order dismissing Stormy Daniels’ defamation case against President Trump, together constitute a total victory for the President, and a total defeat for Stormy Daniels in this case." On July 31, 2020, the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals affirmed the U.S. District Court's ruling, in a unanimous 3-0 decision.
In 2019, Harder sent a letter to CNN on behalf of Trump and his campaign, threatening to sue the network after asserting CNN was violating the federal Lanham Act by marketing itself as a news organization. The threatened lawsuit never materialized.
In 2019, Harder sued Oakley on behalf of US Olympic gold medalist Shaun White, for using his name and image beyond the term permitted by an earlier contract between them.
In 2020, Harder sued VICE Media on behalf of BYD, a multi-billion dollar electric vehicle manufacturer based in China backed by Warren Buffett.


== Personal life ==
Harder bicycled across the US at age 19.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Harder, Charles (April 5, 2016). "Hulk Hogan's Lead Lawyer Explains How His Team Beat "Arrogant," "Defiant" Gawker". The Hollywood Reporter.
Scannell, Kara (August 26, 2016). "Charles Harder, Hollywood's favourite lawyer". Financial Times.
Cieply, Michael (May 29, 2016). "Gawker Case Calls Attention to a Go-To Hollywood Lawyer". The New York Times.
Zengerle, Jason (November 17, 2016). "Charles Harder, the Lawyer Who Killed Gawker, Isn't Done Yet". GQ.
Drange, Matt (May 30, 2016). "Hulk Hogan's Lawyers Have Made Suing Gawker Their 'Bread And Butter'". Forbes.
Khomami, Nadia (October 5, 2016). "Hollywood lawyer who fought Gawker goes to bat for Melania Trump". The Guardian.
Nazaryan, Alexander (October 14, 2016). "Meet Charles Harder, the Gawker Killer Now Working for Melania Trump and Roger Ailes". Newsweek.