Dana Michelle Walden (née Freedman; born 1964 or 1965) is an American businesswoman and the co-chairman of Disney Entertainment. She currently serves as a member of the President's Export Council.


== Career ==


=== Fox Television Group ===
Before her tenure at Disney Entertainment, Walden was previously chairman and CEO of Fox Television Group, which included Fox Broadcasting Company, 20th Century Fox Television, Fox 21 Television Studios, Fox Consumer Products and the syndication supplier, 20th Television.


=== The Walt Disney Company ===
Walden was chairman of Entertainment at Walt Disney Television. On June 9, 2022, Walden replaced Peter Rice as Chairman of Disney General Entertainment Content.
Dana Walden was named co-chairman of Disney Entertainment on February 8, 2023, where she is responsible for global streaming and television. As part of this role, Walden leads ABC Entertainment, ABC News, ABC Owned Television Stations, Disney Branded Television, Disney Television Studios (20th Television, ABC Signature, 20th Television Animation and Walt Disney Television Alternative), Freeform, FX, Hulu Originals, National Geographic Content and Onyx Collective. Under her leadership, The Walt Disney Company earned a record 183 Emmy Award nominations in 2024.
In April 2024, CNBC reported that Walden was in the running to become Disney's next CEO, if chosen, she would be the first female CEO of Disney in its 100-year history.
In September 2025, Walden made the decision to put Jimmy Kimmel Live!, a late night television program airing on American Broadcasting Company (ABC), on indefinite suspension due to his comments on the previously aired episode regarding the investigation of the alleged shooter of Charlie Kirk. In his show's opening monologue on Sept. 15, Kimmel said supporters of President Donald Trump were "desperately trying to characterize" Tyler Robinson, the 22-year-old charged in Kirk's murder, as "anything other than one of them." In the week prior, Kimmel also criticized Trump for saying Democrats were responsible for Kirk's death at a Utah campus on Sept. 10. Following the announcement that the FCC would investigate these statements, Walden preemptively put the production on suspension moments before it was to be filmed, even as audience members were already on site and as Kimmel had planned to clarify his statements on the previously aired episodes. This action has been called into question by every other late night television host, including Stephen Colbert and Jimmy Fallon, as well as entertainment industry veterans Jean Smart, Billy Eichner, and Margaret Cho. Additionally, both SAG-AFTRA and Writers Guild of America both took issue with Walden's choice to pull the program off the air. "SAG-AFTRA condemns the suspension of Jimmy Kimmel Live! Our society depends on freedom of expression. Suppression of free speech and retaliation for speaking out on significant issues of public concern run counter to the fundamental rights we all rely on. Democracy thrives when diverse points of view are expressed. The decision to suspend airing Jimmy Kimmel Live! is the type of suppression and retaliation that endangers everyone’s freedoms. SAG-AFTRA stands with all media artists and defends their right to express their diverse points of view, and everyone’s right to hear them," as stated by SAG-AFTRA. "The right to speak our minds and to disagree with each other – to disturb, even – is at the very heart of what it means to be a free people. It is not to be denied. Not by violence, not by the abuse of governmental power, nor by acts of corporate cowardice," said the WGA in their official statement. Disney ended Kimmel's suspension five days later.
Kimmel praised Walden for how she handled the situation and even endorsed her in succeeding Bob Iger as CEO of the Walt Disney Company.


=== Other board positions ===
Walden sits on the board of directors for Live Nation Entertainment and UCLA's Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center.


== Personal life ==
Walden married Matt, a business executive, in 1995. They have two daughters. As of 2024, they live in Brentwood, Los Angeles. Her grandmother Rose Freedman, an immigrant from Austria, was a survivor of the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire who lived to the age of 107. She is of Jewish descent.


=== Politics ===
Walden has donated to Democratic Party politicians and hosted fundraising events for the party. She and her husband have also been longtime friends of Kamala Harris and her husband, Doug Emhoff.
President Joe Biden appointed Walden to the President's Export Council and to the primary advisory committee on international trade in 2023.


== Awards and accolades ==
Walden was named MIPCOM's Personality of the Year in 2015. She has been named "Showman of the Year" by Variety and "Executive of the Year" in 2019 by The Hollywood Reporter. In 2021, Walden was given a Lifetime Achievement Award from Harvard Undergraduate Women in Business. In 2023, Walden ranked 39th in Forbes Magazine's list of "World's 100 most powerful women". She was ranked 39th on Fortune's list of Most Powerful Women in 2023.
In 2024, the Producers Guild of America announced that Walden will receive the guild's Milestone Award at the 36th Producers Guild of America Awards ceremony.


== References ==