President and Fellows of Harvard College v. United States Department of Health and Human Services, et al. is a lawsuit filed in April 2025 by the Harvard Corporation against the Trump administration over the suspension of hundreds of millions of dollars in federal research funding. On September 3, Burroughs ruled in favor of Harvard, finding the government had violated its free speech rights and used allegations of antisemitism as a "smokescreen for a targeted, ideologically-motivated assault on this country's premier universities".


== Background ==
According to university president Alan Garber, funding for research at Harvard was affected by a federal grant pause imposed in January 2025. The pause was later halted by a court order. Garber later criticized funding cuts at the National Institute of Health that would reduce grants at Harvard Medical School. John Shaw, the vice provost for research, submitted a declaration with a lawsuit filed by thirteen universities, though Harvard did not join the lawsuit. In March, the Trump administration stated it would conduct a review of US$9 billion in federal funding to Harvard University.


== Lawsuit ==
On April 21, 2025, the President and Fellows of Harvard College sued several Trump officials, including secretary of health and human services Robert F. Kennedy Jr., secretary of education Linda McMahon, acting administrator of the General Services Administration Stephen Ehikian, and attorney general Pam Bondi, as well as their agencies, in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts. Harvard alleged that the Trump administration had levied its response to the university as "leverage to gain control of academic decision-making at Harvard."
On September 2, The Boston Globe reported that the government's lawyer, Michael Velchik, had previously submitted a paper written from the perspective of Adolf Hitler while a senior at Harvard and later wrote to a friend that he enjoyed Mein Kampf more than any other book he'd read.


== Legal proceedings ==
On July 21, 2025, Harvard and the Department of Justice made arguments before judge Allison Burroughs in court. On September 3, Burroughs ruled in favor of Harvard, writing that the government had infringed upon Harvard's free speech rights and that it was "difficult to conclude anything other than that defendants used antisemitism as a smokescreen for a targeted, ideologically-motivated assault on this country's premier universities".


== See also ==
Education policy of the second Donald Trump administration
Academic freedom


== References ==


== External links ==
Docket on CourtListener
Complaint for declaratory and injunctive relief on Harvard.edu