Jessica González-Rojas (born May 19, 1976) is an American activist, politician, and academic serving as a member of the New York State Assembly from the 34th district since 2021. A Democrat and member of the New York City Democratic Socialists of America, she was first elected in 2020 after defeating incumbent Michael DenDekker in the primary.


== Early life, education, and career ==
González-Rojas earned a bachelor's degree in international relations from Boston University and a Master's in Public Administration (M.P.A.) from New York University's Robert F. Wagner Graduate School of Public Service. González-Rojas is of Paraguayan and Puerto Rican descent.

González-Rojas previously served as the executive director of the National Latina Institute for Reproductive Health, an organization that advocates for access to affordable health and reproductive care for Latino and immigrant communities. González-Rojas has additionally served as an adjunct professor of Latin American Studies at the City University of New York's City College.


== New York State Assembly ==
In 2019, González-Rojas announced she was running in the 2020 Democratic primary for the 34th district of the New York State Assembly, held by Michael DenDekker, and covering parts of Jackson Heights, Woodside, Corona and East Elmhurst, all within Queens, New York. Her campaign was endorsed by U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders. She won the June primary and the November election. She was re-elected in November 2024, running on the Democratic Party and Working Family Party lines.
González-Rojas is a member of the Democratic Socialists of America (DSA). In the 2021 New York City mayoral election, she was the first elected official to endorse Dianne Morales, a progressive nonprofit executive.
In December 2024, González-Rojas' bill was signed into law by Governor Kathy Hochul mandating that all New York State agencies add Middle Eastern and North African categories on applications and surveys for self-identification.
In July 2025, González-Rojas announced her campaign for the New York State Senate in 2026 for the 13th district held by incumbent Democrat Jessica Ramos. Ramos had drawn backlash for previously alienating progressives and endorsing Andrew Cuomo in the 2025 New York City Democratic mayoral primary. Upon announcing her candidacy, González-Rojas was endorsed by New York City Comptroller Brad Lander, Borough President Donovan Richards, fellow assemblymember Catalina Cruz, and New York City Councilmembers Shekar Krishnan and Tiffany Cabán.


=== Committee membership ===
González-Rojas is a member of the Committee on Children and Families, the Committee on Cities, the Committee on Corporations, Authorities and Commissions, the Committee on Environmental Conservation, and the Committee on Social Services. She is also a member of the Asian Pacific American Task Force, the Black, Puerto Rican, Hispanic & Asian Legislative Caucus, the Legislative Women's Caucus, the Task Force on New Americans, the Puerto Rican/Hispanic Task Force, and the Task Force on Women's Issues.


== Personal life ==
González-Rojas is queer.


== References ==