Donald Trump, the 45th and 47th president of the United States, has created or promoted many deceptive or disproven conspiracy theories, to a degree unprecedented in American politics.


== Conspiracy theories ==


=== Attacks on political opponents ===


==== Barack and Michelle Obama ====
Obama citizenship conspiracy theories, aka "Birtherism", later retracted
Conspiracy that Bill Ayers wrote Obama's memoir Dreams from My Father
False claims of fraud in the 2012 election
Pushed conspiracy theory that Obama supported ISIS
Claim that Obama secretly controlled the Biden administration
False accusation that Obama and other officials committed "treason" against him
Shared a video from Alex Jones that had a caption claiming that “Michelle Obama may have used Biden’s autopen in the final days of his disastrous administration to pardon key individuals”.


==== Bill and Hillary Clinton ====
False accusation that Hillary Clinton started the birther conspiracy theory
Clinton body count conspiracy theory
Retweeted the false accusation that Jeffrey Epstein's death was arranged by Bill Clinton.
Said at CPAC on February 27, 2015, when asked about his thoughts about Bill Clinton: "Nice guy, got a lot of problems coming up in my opinion with the famous island with Jeffrey Epstein, a lot of problems." (Remarks start at 22:50)
Support of the Pizzagate conspiracy theory and portrayals of the Clintons as pedophiles
Suicide of Vince Foster
Murder of Seth Rich
Claimed that Hillary Clinton gave uranium rights to Russia in exchange for donations to the Clinton Foundation
Claimed that Hillary Clinton "meets in secret with international banks to plot the destruction of U.S. sovereignty"


==== Ted Cruz ====
Assassination of John F. Kennedy – alleged Rafael Cruz, the father of Texas Senator and Republican presidential candidate for the 2016 elections Ted Cruz, had ties to Lee Harvey Oswald.  Trump later stated that he did not actually believe the story.


==== Joe and Hunter Biden ====
Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory
Osama bin Laden death conspiracy theories, explicitly claiming Biden and Obama staged killing with body double, and may have had SEAL Team 6 killed
Hunter Biden laptop controversy and China business dealings conspiracy theory
Hunter Biden cocaine conspiracy theory, specifically relating to the cocaine found in the White House in July 2023
Baseless accusation that Joe Biden is being controlled by "People that you've never heard of, people that are in the dark shadows."
False accusation that the Biden administration had been ready to kill him during the FBI search of Mar-a-Lago
False accusation that FEMA spent money on housing illegal immigrants, leaving it unable to fund hurricane disaster response.
Claimed that the Biden administration directed federal agencies to bribe news organizations for positive coverage
Shared a post that Biden was executed in 2020 and replaced by a robotic clone
Claimed that the Epstein files are falsified documents created by his political opponents, such as the Biden administration.


==== Kamala Harris ====
Harris citizenship conspiracy theories
Accused Harris of paying celebrities for endorsements, including Bruce Springsteen, Oprah Winfrey, and Bono, falsely claiming that $11 million was paid to Beyoncé


==== Joe Scarborough ====
Joe Scarborough conspiracy theory


==== Others ====
Claimed that Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau was secretly the son of Cuban leader Fidel Castro
Posted a screenshot of a story claiming that Nikki Haley was disqualified from being president
Spread false conspiracy theories about the attack on Paul Pelosi, suggesting it could have been staged
Suggested that Ruth Bader Ginsburg's dying wish may have been manufactured by the Democratic political leadership in Congress
Claimed that the United States House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack had "deleted and destroyed all the evidence"
Said that James Comey "was calling for the assassination of the president" when he posted an image of seashells spelling "86 47"


=== Claims about clandestine opposition ===


==== Deep State ====
Claims of a "deep state" conspiracy resisting Trump administration objectives and proper prosecution of Trump foes


==== QAnon ====
Expressions of support for QAnon adherents


==== Antifa ====
Claiming those resisting authoritarianism and fascism in the USA are led by an organization identified as "Antifa", an abbreviation for anti-fascism
Attribution of Buffalo police shoving incident to antifa
Claimed that a plane full of "thugs in dark uniforms", implying antifa, had recently flown from one unidentified city to another with the intention of fomenting riots


==== Anarchists ====
Retweeted a One America News Network tweet that ongoing George Floyd protests constituted a "coup attempt" that was "led by a well funded network of anarchists".


=== Russian interference, Robert Mueller investigation deflections ===
Allegations of Obama spying on Trump, including Spygate and Trump Tower wiretapping allegations
Allegations of Hillary Clinton spying on Trump
Russiagate hoax. Trump and his defenders have used terms like "Russia hoax", "Russian collusion hoax", and "Russiagate hoax" to delegitimize accusations and investigations of alleged impropriety, cooperation, collusion, or conspiracy between the Trump campaign and the government, officials, and intelligence agencies of Russia. They assert that such accusations are a hoax perpetrated against Trump by his critics and that he is the victim of a witch hunt. Trump and his supporters have produced no evidence of such a hoax.
The "hoax" accusation has been debunked by numerous sources and is contradicted by investigative findings of what "the president, members of his campaign and his associates actually did".
Pursued the theory that Ukraine, rather than Russia, interfered in the 2016 election


=== 2016, 2020 and 2024 election claims ===

Trump's false claim of a stolen election
Italygate
Stop the Steal and conspiracy theories
Voter conspiracy theories
Claimed he won the popular vote during the 2016 presidential election, saying "I think there was tremendous cheating in California, there was tremendous cheating in New York and other places".
Claimed that Google manipulated votes in the 2016 election
Tweeted that Google results were "RIGGED" against him.
Tweeted about a conspiracy theory that voting machines made by Dominion Voting Systems had deleted millions of Trump votes.
Referred to the first release of the Twitter Files as proof of "Big Tech companies, the DNC, & the Democrat Party" rigging the 2020 United States presidential election against him, declaring that "the termination of all rules, regulations, and articles, even those found in the Constitution" was necessary.
Cited an unverified report that between three and five million non-citizens voted in the 2016 elections
Claimed that videos produced by James O'Keefe proved Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama had "hired people" and "paid them $1,500" to "be violent, cause fights, [and] do bad things" at Trump rallies.


=== Claims of corrupt science, medicine, and statistics ===
COVID-19 deaths systematically overcounted
Allegations of collusion between Anthony Fauci and the pharmaceutical industry
Claims that Bill Gates and Anthony Fauci profited from COVID-19 vaccinations
Global warming conspiracy theory, claimed that "The concept of global warming was created by and for the Chinese in order to make U.S. manufacturing non-competitive."
Hurricane Maria death toll controversy
Mob responsible for movement against asbestos
Vaccines cause autism, tweeted "Healthy young child goes to doctor, gets pumped with massive shot of many vaccines, doesn't feel good and changes - AUTISM. Many such cases!" Tweeted, "I am being proven right about massive vaccinations—the doctors lied. Save our children & their future" and that parents "know far better than fudged-up reports." At Republican debate, claimed " Just the other day, two years old, 2½ years old, a child, a beautiful child went to have the vaccine, and came back, and a week later got a tremendous fever, got very, very sick, now is autistic."
Wind turbines cause cancer
Accused Erika McEntarfer of rigging labor statistics for political reasons to make him look bad, and had her fired.


=== Claims about national, ethnic, religious or racial groups ===
Great replacement conspiracy theory, alleging that non-white immigrants from Latin America are seeking to displace American citizens in areas of employment, housing, and education.
Tweeted infographic falsely stating that whites killed by blacks constitute 81% of crime, citing the nonexistent "Crime Statistics Bureau — San Francisco"
Alleged actions by Muslims as claimed by Britain First
Claimed to have witnessed Muslims in Jersey City cheering the 9/11 terrorist attack
Endorsement of counter-jihad themes, as well as individuals associated with the movement
Syrian refugee as ISIS members conspiracy
Mexican government forces criminals across border
White genocide conspiracy theory
Haitian immigrants in Springfield, Ohio eating cats and dogs
Claimed that ISIS members were hiding within the Central American migrant caravans


=== Claims of paid protestors ===
Suggested violent protestors were being funded by "some very stupid rich people"
Alleging that antifa activists were being funded by Democrats, George Soros or "other people".
Claimed that protestors against his crackdown in Washington D.C. were paid by the Democrats
Accused California Governor Gavin Newsom and Los Angeles Mayor Karen Bass of paying protesters in Los Angeles.


=== Claims about George Soros ===
That Soros was backing the protests against Kavanaugh's Supreme Court nomination.
That Soros funded the Central American migrant caravans heading toward the United States.
That district attorney Alvin Bragg was "bought and paid for" by Soros.


=== Questioning terrorism ===
9/11 conspiracy theories
Negationism regarding the January 6 Capitol attack
Claim that Hamas terrorists are "pouring into our once beautiful USA, through our TOTALLY OPEN SOUTHERN BORDER"
Claimed that the FBI had planted 274 agents in the January 6 crowd and implied they helped provoke the attack on the Capitol.


=== Other ===
Referenced a conspiracy theory about Antonin Scalia's death, saying "they say they found a pillow on his face, which is a pretty unusual place to find a pillow."
Claimed that the FBI knows the identity of the individual who placed two pipe bombs outside the DNC and RNC on January 6th.
Claimed that Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro controls Tren de Aragua, which Trump says is invading the U.S.
Cast doubt on whether the U.S. gold reserves were still at Fort Knox.
Alluded to the conspiracy theory that Imran Awan was hiding “missing” DNC servers in the middle of remarks about Russian election interference, asking “What happened to the servers of the Pakistani gentleman that worked on the DNC? Where are those servers?”
Shared and then deleted an apparently AI-generated video, starring himself, promoting “medbeds”, a pseudoscientific medical device popularised by QAnon.


== Conspiracy theorists endorsed by Trump ==
Donald Trump has encouraged individuals who spread conspiracy theories.

Had dinner with Kanye West after he had promoted anti-Semitic conspiracy theories and had vowed to go "death  [sic] con 3 On JEWISH PEOPLE" on his Twitter account. His dinner guest was Nick Fuentes, a well-known Holocaust denier.
Alex Jones, publisher of Infowars, a climate change denialist who has said that the World Bank invented the "hoax" of climate change, falsely claims that vaccines cause autism and who encouraged his listeners to harass the victims of the Sandy Hook elementary school shooting, which he called a "hoax". Trump appeared on Infowars, where he praised Jones's "amazing reputation", and repeated Jones's claims on the campaign trail.
Paul Joseph Watson, who worked for Alex Jones' Infowars and whose conspiracy theory interests include chemtrails, the New World Order and the Illuminati.
Laura Loomer, who has made false claims about several U.S. mass shootings, including that they were affiliated with ISIS or that the shootings were entirely staged
Jack Posobiec, known for promoting the Pizzagate conspiracy theory.
Sidney Powell, an attorney who joined the Trump legal team in 2020, although the team distanced itself from her after she publicly claimed that the 2020 election had been rigged by an elaborate international communist plot. She filed and lost four federal cases, alleging voter fraud of "biblical" proportions and claiming that voting machines had been secretly programmed to switch votes from Trump to Biden.
Rudy Giuliani, the former Mayor of New York City during the September 11 attacks, best known in more recent years for his role as Donald Trump's attorney in various lawsuits pertaining to and a leading proponent of conspiracy theories about the 2020 presidential election, such as that between 65,000 and 165,000 ballots in Georgia were illegally cast by underage voters, that between 32,000 and "a few hundred thousand" illegal immigrants voted in Arizona, and that from 8,021 to 30,000 votes in Pennsylvania were cast fraudulently by people voting in the names of deceased persons whose names had yet to be purged from voter rolls.
L. Lin Wood, an attorney who promoted conspiracy theories about the 2020 presidential election, claiming that Trump had won the election with 70% of the vote, and that a secret cabal of international communists, Chinese intelligence, and Republican officials had contrived to steal the election from Trump. Wood also claims that "no planes" hit the World Trade Center and Pentagon on September 11, 2001, and that planes visible in the footage are "CGI". He announced that he had "entered the public debate around the 'flat earth' issue", endorsing the belief that it is flat.
Kelly Townsend, an Arizona Senator sought out Trump in 2011 pushing the Obama birther conspiracy. Townsend along with Roger Stone associate Jerome Corsi, Sheriff Joe Arpaio, and 2020 Maricopa County Sheriff candidate and then chief Arpaio staffer Jerry Sheridan, worked with informant Dennis Montgomery. In 2020, Townsend worked again with Jerome Corsi claiming the election was stolen from Donald Trump and emailed Corsi a document of Arizona Senators endorsing Trump electors for Vice President Pence, in an attempt to overturn the 2020 election. In November 2020, Townsend assisted Sidney Powell along with her birther conspiracy associate Dennis Montgomery who back in 2011 alleged Hammer and Scorecard was spying and used to hack into government computers and change Obama's birth certificate, and in 2020 with Townsend and Powell shifted his claims stating the supercomputer was being used to hack and flip votes in favor of Biden in 2020, and Townsend was listed as a key witness in Powell's Arizona election fraud case. In the lead up to January 6, 2021, Townsend sponsored a bill that would designate Trump electors to Arizona and promoted the Arizona audit and stolen election claims. Townsend has also been a leader of the anti-vax movement claiming in 2019 that all vaccines are communist.
Rick Wiles, founder of TruNews was granted press credentials by the Trump administration.  Wiles is known for pushing homophobic and anti-semitic conspiracy theories, including that the Jews seek to take control of the United States to "kill millions of Christians" and stated, "9/11 wasn't done by the Muslims. It was done by a wildcard, the Israeli Mossad, that's cunning and ruthless and can carry out attacks on Americans and make it look like Arabs did it." In July 2018, during the Trump administration, he claimed that Anderson Cooper and Rachel Maddow were going to lead a "homosexual coup on the White House" that would result in the nationally televised decapitation of the Trump family on the White House lawn.
Roger Stone, long-term political advisor to Donald Trump. Suggested Seth Rich’s parents were paid off to avoid pursuing an investigation into his murder. Posted a screenshot from Laura Loomer and claimed that Nikki Haley was "Constitutionally ineligible to be President".  Pardoned by Trump in connection with the Mueller investigation.
Michael Flynn, retired U.S. Army lieutenant general and former National Security Advisor to Trump.  Pledged an oath to the QAnon movement.  Asserted the COVID-19 pandemic was fabricated as "a distraction to what happened on 3 November," referring to the 2020 presidential election which he maintains was stolen.
Marjorie Taylor Greene, member of the United States House of Representatives.  Supported the QAnon conspiracy theory.  Promoted the theory that the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting was staged.
Tucker Carlson, political commentator.  Promoted "the Great Replacement" conspiracy theory, that Democrats are importing immigrants to replace the current electorate with more "obedient" voters.  Alleged that the January 6th Capitol attack was a "false flag" FBI operation.
Donald Trump Jr., businessman, political activist and eldest child of Donald Trump.  During the 2020 presidential election he called for "total war" as the results were counted.  Amplified Russian propaganda which claimed that the US and Ukraine were developing biological weapons.
Lou Dobbs, political commentator, author, and television host.  Gave air time to birtherism theories as early as 2009.  One of three Fox Corporation program hosts named in a $2.7 billion defamation lawsuit by Smartmatic.  Supported the claim that Dominion’s machines were rigged to switch votes from Trump to Biden.
Candace Owens, commentator and political activist.  Endorsed the conspiracy theory that Brigitte Macron, wife of French President Emmanuel Macron, was secretly transgender. Claimed on Twitter that the gunman involved in the Robb Elementary School shooting could be transgender and said that he was "cross-dressing".
Mike Lindell, businessman and political activist.  Directed and starred in Absolute Proof, in which he claimed that hackers infiltrated local election office computer systems to alter vote counts — which he calls the “largest cyber-crime in global history.”
Christina Bobb, lawyer, television personality and Republican Party official.  Named in a $1.6 billion defamation lawsuit by Dominion Voting Systems against OANN.  Promoted the 2021 Maricopa County presidential ballot audit. Said during a podcast that she believed the political left sought to "normalize pedophilia."
Dinesh D'Souza, political commentator, author, and filmmaker.  Produced the film "2000 Mules”, which claims that 2,000 “mules” illegally collected and delivered 400,000 mail ballots to drop boxes across several key swing states during the 2020 presidential election.
Rush Limbaugh, radio talk show host.  Suggested that the October 2018 United States mail bombing attempts were likely a false flag operation carried out by a "Democratic operative". Suggested that the Christchurch mosque shootings of March 2019 may have been a false-flag attack.


=== Conspiracy theorists in the second Trump administration ===
Donald Trump, President of the United States
Kash Patel, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
Robert F. Kennedy Jr., Secretary of Health and Human Services
Peter Navarro, senior counselor for trade and manufacturing
Laura Loomer, influenced President Trump to dismiss more than half a dozen national security officials
Devin Nunes, Chair of the President's Intelligence Advisory Board
Dan Bongino, deputy director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
Darren Beattie, acting Under Secretary of State for Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs
Kingsley Wilson, Department of Defense press secretary
Joe Kent, Director of the National Counterterrorism Center
Paul Ingrassia (lawyer)


== See also ==
Conspiracy theories in United States politics (in 2016, in 2020, in 2024)
False or misleading statements by Donald Trump
Election denial movement in the United States (in 2016, in 2020, in 2024)
2000 Mules
Absolute Proof
Russia investigation origins conspiracy theory
George Soros conspiracy theories (in 2010s, in 2020s)
Post-truth politics
Rhetoric of Donald Trump


== Notes ==


== References ==