As the 47th president of the United States, Donald Trump has relied extensively on executive orders. In the first 100 days of his presidency, Trump signed 143 executive orders (an average of over one per day), more than any other president had signed in their first 100 days in office. Franklin D. Roosevelt previously held the record, signing 99 executive orders in 1933. On his first day in office, Trump issued 26 executive orders, the most of any president on their first day in office. The executive orders rescinded many of the previous administration's executive actions, began the withdrawal process from the World Health Organization and Paris Agreement, rolled back federal recognition of gender identity, founded the Department of Government Efficiency, reaffirmed the existing constitutional right to free speech, reversed the withdrawal of Cuba's designation as a state sponsor of terrorism, reversed sanctions on Israeli settlers, rolled back policy on artificial intelligence, reversed the Family Reunification Task Force, pardoned over 1,500 January 6 rioters, designated Mexican drug cartels as foreign terrorist organizations, attempted to end birthright citizenship for new children of illegal immigrants and immigrants legally but temporarily present in the U.S. (such as those on student, work, or tourist visas), delayed the government's ban of TikTok, and declared a national emergency on the southern border, triggering the deployment of the U.S. military.
Several of Trump's orders have been considered to have ignored or violated federal laws, regulations, and the Constitution. Some have been blocked in court for these reasons. Four days into his presidency, an analysis conducted by Time found that nearly two-thirds of his executive actions "mirror or partially mirror" proposals from Project 2025, which was seconded by analysis from Bloomberg Government. 


== 2025 ==


== See also ==

Executive order
List of executive orders in the first Trump presidency, EO #13765–13984 (2017–2021)
List of executive actions by Joe Biden, EO #13985–14146 (2021–2025)
List of executive actions by Donald Trump
List of bills in the 119th United States Congress
List of acts of the 119th United States Congress


== References ==