Patricia Fahy is an American politician and a member of the Democratic Party, who currently represents parts of Albany County, Schenectady County, and Montgomery County in the New York State Senate, including all of the city of Albany. She was previously was Assemblymember for the 109th District, representing parts of Albany County, for 12 years. Before serving on the state legislature, Fahy was president of the Albany City Board of Education. She is the first woman in New York State history to be elected to the Capital Assembly and Senate seats.


== Electoral history ==


=== 2012 elections ===
On September 13, 2012, there was a primary election in the Democratic Party to replace the retiring incumbent Jack McEneny, who had been an assemblyman for 20 years. Fahy received 5,335 votes (36.34%) in a crowded field that included Frank J. Commisso, Jr., Christopher T. Higgins, William J. McCarthy, Jr., Jim Coyne and Margarita Perez, as well as write-in candidates. Ted J. Danz, Jr., however, beat Fahy in the Independence Party primary held the same date, 51 to 46%, with some write-ins. Her opponents were all politically well-connected: Commisso, Jr. was a sitting member of the Albany Common Council; Higgins was a sitting member of the Albany County Legislature; McCarthy was an attorney and scion of a well-known family of the area; Perez was a notable local political activist; businessman Danz had been active in local Republican politics for decades.
In the November 2012 general election, Fahy won with 37,967 votes, or almost 63%, on the Democratic and Working Family party lines, against Danz, who received about 32.5% on the Republican and Independence lines, and the perennial candidate and Tea Party activist Joseph P. Sullivan on the Conservative line, who got about 3.5% of the vote.


=== 2024 election ===
Fahy succeeded retiring incumbent state senator Neil Breslin of New York's 46th State Senate District after defeating Republican Ted Danz in the 2024 election, 56% to 44%.


== Legislative work ==

Fahy raised concerns about the impact of Governor Andrew Cuomo's proposed 2014-2015 budget on P-12 education.
In February 2017, Fahy, along with Albany Mayor Kathy Sheehan and Congressman Paul Tonko, were criticized by Bishop Edward Scharfenberger for being Catholic politicians who supported and attended a rally for Planned Parenthood. The rally, which drew hundreds of attendees in support of Planned Parenthood, emphasized the risk of losing services like pregnancy testing and cancer screening due to potential federal funding cuts.
In 2019, Fahy penned an op-ed in the Albany Times Union that called for the reimagining of I-787. In 2022, she secured $5 million for a feasibility study to reimagine the highway, and in 2025, Governor Kathy Hochul pledged $35 million to fully reimagine 787 alongside downtown Albany as part of the $400 million 'Championing Albany's Potential' initiative.
In 2021, Fahy sponsored and passed New York State's first-ever Gun Industry Liability Law with State Senator Zellnor Myrie to hold the firearms industry accountable for their role in the gun violence epidemic.
In 2022, Fahy sponsored and passed the nation's first right to repair law, the New York Digital Fair Repair Act, which requires manufacturers of certain electronic devices to make diagnostic and repair information, parts, and tools available to independent repair shops and consumers on "fair and reasonable terms". Since then, multiple states have introduced and passed different versions of their own right-to-repair laws.
Fahy also sponsored legislation, passed and signed into law in 2022, that requires New York State to conserve 30% of its land and water by 2030 as part of the 30 by 30 movement.
In 2024, as the Higher Education Chair in the Assembly, Fahy led the push to '#TurnOnTheTap' and expand New York State's Tuition Assistance Program (TAP), which assists middle and low-income students with the cost of tuition at SUNY and CUNY schools. This resulted in the first expansion in New York's financial assistance program for students in more than 25 years and a doubling of award amounts.
At the beginning of 2025, Fahy continued her longtime push to significantly expand New York's Earned Income Tax Credit under legislation she sponsors to support working and middle class households amid the 2025 affordability crisis in the United States. 
On March 27, 2025, Fahy introduced a bill that would issue new certificates of registration to ZEV-exclusive manufacturers not previously permitted to participate in direct manufacturer auto sales in New York State.
On July 15, 2025, Fahy introduced legislation that would ban ICE agents from wearing masks during civilian immigration actions conducted in New York State.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official biography at the New York State Senate website
Official biography at the New York State Assembly website
Biography at Election campaign website Archived February 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine
Facebook page
LinkedIn page
OpenStates page