Simcha Felder (born 30 December, 1958) is an American politician from the state of New York and a member of the New York City Council. 
A Democrat, Felder represented the 44th district in the New York City Council from 2002 to 2010. He later represented the 17th district in the New York State Senate from 2013 to 2022 and represented New York's 22nd State Senate district from 2023 to 2025. In 2025, he returned to the City Council to represent District 44 once again.
In 2025, Felder was described by Spectrum News/New York 1 as "a revered long-serving politician in Brooklyn's Orthodox Jewish community". He is known for his advocacy for yeshivas, for his willingness to caucus with Republicans (which has created consternation amongst other Democrats), and for his conservative record.


== Early life, education, and early career ==
Felder's father was Rabbi Harry Felder, spiritual leader of Beth Aaron Congregation in Borough Park. Felder is an Orthodox Jew. His brothers are Rabbi Shmuel Felder and Rabbi Chaim Moshe Felder.
Felder is a certified public accountant. He holds a master's degree in business administration from the Zicklin School of Business at Baruch College.
Felder has worked as a tax auditor for the New York City Department of Finance. In the 1990s, he worked for the New York City Comptroller's Office. Felder has also served as chief of staff to one-time Democratic Assemblymember Dov Hikind.


== New York City Council (2002–2010) ==
Felder was elected to the New York City Council in District 44 in 2001. He was re-elected in 2005 and 2009.
During his tenure on the City Council, Felder gained popularity among his conservative Jewish constituents for advocating on their behalf and for supporting Israel. Although personally opposed to homosexuality as being against Orthodox Judaism, he backed Christine Quinn for City Council Speaker in what was seen as a political move to gain allies. Although Felder claimed to support Quinn, he said he could not actually vote for her because of religious reasons. When the time came to vote on Quinn's candidacy for Council Speaker, Felder took a trip to the restroom, and did not cast a vote.
Felder backed city funding for religious schools, while maintaining that he opposed displays of religion in public schools. Felder has also gained attention by calling for better labeling of caffeine content in foods and beverages, as well as a ban on the distribution of unsolicited fliers. Felder also became known for his attempt to ban the feeding of pigeons in New York City.
In 2005, Felder crossed party lines to endorse then-Republican Mike Bloomberg in his bid for re-election as New York City mayor. Felder
asserted that Bloomberg was the only Republican he had ever voted for, and implied that Bloomberg would be the only Republican he would ever support.
Felder was Chair of the Council's Subcommittee on Landmarks, Public Siting, and Maritime uses in his first term. In January 2006, he became Chair of the Committee on Governmental Operations. As Chair of Governmental Operations, Felder supported Mayor Bloomberg's plan to curb Pay to Play contracting practices, and the Mayor's bid to extend term limits, so that the Mayor could run for a third term.
The committee also provided oversight of the City Board of Elections' implementation of the Help America Vote Act, and enacted legislation to transfer the Environmental Control Board from the Department of Environmental Protection to the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings. The Committee also enacted legislation to extend term limits from two terms to three. As a member of the Council's Land Use Committee, Felder was part of a group of New York state legislators that has consistently blocked plans to renovate United Nations headquarters, calling the UN anti-American and anti-Israel. In spite of such calls, the UN announced in 2007 that it would undergo a $1 billion makeover.
In April 2006, Felder accused the highest-ranking uniformed member of the NYPD, Chief Joseph Esposito, of using inappropriate language when Esposito attempted to quell individuals who entered a police station during a riot in Borough Park. Felder indicated that he personally heard the chief say, "Get the fucking Jews out of here." The Civilian Complaint Review Board, which investigates police misconduct, later found the accusation against Esposito unsubstantiated, but did reprimand him for using profanity.
Felder resigned his City Council post in 2010 to take a position working for New York City Comptroller John Liu.


== New York State Senate (2013–2025) ==

In 2008, Felder challenged incumbent State Senator Kevin Parker in a Democratic primary in Senate District 21. Parker won the primary with less than 50% of the vote.
Felder was elected to the New York State Senate in District 17 in November 2012. The district had been reconfigured as a "Super Jewish" district; reportedly, the Republican-controlled chamber drew the district specifically with Felder in mind. Even though incumbent David Storobin had won the seat in a special election, the GOP offered little support to him, and Felder handily defeated him.
Following his election to the Senate, Felder announced that, despite being elected as a Democrat, he intended to caucus with the Republicans. Felder also stated his willingness to return to the Senate Democratic Conference if doing so would benefit his district. Brooklyn Democratic Party Chairman Frank Seddio called Felder's defection a "disgrace and a complete betrayal of his constituents".
Felder is known as a conservative Democrat. As a State Senator, Felder was the only Democrat to vote against $15-per-hour minimum wage legislation. He cast deciding votes against an immigration bill called the New York Dream Act, stated that ending stop-and-frisk was a mistake, opposed plastic bag fees, and supported Iran divestment and anti-BDS laws. On the final day of the 2013 legislative session, Felder voted against a hostile amendment that would have attached a pro-choice bill to an unrelated piece of legislation. Unlike nearly all other New York Democrats, Felder is a staunch opponent of abortion rights.
Felder was re-elected to the Senate without opposition in 2014 and 2016. In the latter election, he ran on the Democratic, Republican, and Conservative lines.
In April 2018, other lawmakers accused Felder of "essentially holding the $168 billion budget hostage until the state agreed not to interfere with the curriculum at the private Jewish schools known as yeshivas".
After an April 2018 agreement returned the Independent Democratic Conference (a breakaway faction of Democrats) to the mainline Democratic conference, Felder became the swing vote in the State Senate; this placed a spotlight on his continued affiliation with Senate Republicans. On April 24, 2018, Felder announced that he intended to continue caucusing with Senate Republicans during the remaining weeks of the 2018 legislative session; Felder made this statement despite the possibility that two special elections being held that day could give the Democratic Party a numerical majority in the State Senate, and despite Governor Andrew Cuomo's public support for Democratic control of the Senate. On April 25, Cuomo sent Felder an open letter to pressure him to rejoin the Senate Democratic Conference. Felder continued to caucus with the Republicans.
In June 2018, Democratic State Committee members approved an informal resolution recommending Felder's ouster from the party. Former state Democratic Chairman Jay Jacobs, speaking to reporters afterward, reiterated the Committee's exasperation with Felder. Jacobs said: 

It's my belief is that the party is not merely a vessel for someone's personal ambition to take someone from where they are to where they want to be. The party represents certain principles. Here, you have someone who took the Democratic line, ran on it, won on it, and immediately stood with the Republicans.
In the 2018 Democratic primary in September 2018, Felder defeated Blake Morris, a lawyer. Felder won re-election on November 6, 2018.
The 2018 elections saw the Democrats win control of the State Senate for only the second time since World War II. Felder sought to rejoin the Senate Democratic Conference. However, on December 31, 2018, the Senate Democratic Conference announced that Felder would not be allowed to rejoin its ranks. Even without Felder, the Democrats had 39 Senate seats, seven more than the 32 needed for a majority. On January 9, 2019, the Daily News reported that Felder had decided against caucusing with the Republicans, and was looking forward to rejoining the Senate Democrats "'at the appropriate time'".
Felder was accepted into the Democratic caucus July 1, 2019, after having voted with the Democrats on multiple major pieces of legislation.
In 2022, following redistricting, Felder - who represented New York's 17th Senate District - sought re-election in New York's 22nd Senate district. Felder won re-election in the 22nd Senate District in November 2022.
Felder's final day in the legislature was April 9, 2025. He stepped down from his Senate seat, after being elected to the New York City Council. His farewell speech marked only the third time he had ever spoken on the Senate floor.


== New York City Council (2025–present) ==
Felder returned to the New York City Council in 2025.
Following the 2024 election of New York City Council member Kalman Yeger to the New York State Assembly, Felder announced his candidacy for Yeger's seat on the New York City Council representing District 44. Felder had held the same seat during his previous City Council tenure. On March 25, 2025, he won the seat with more than 81% of the vote.


== Personal life ==
Felder resides in Borough Park, Brooklyn.


== References ==


== External links ==
New York State Senate Site Simcha Felder
Ballotpedia: Simcha Felder