The Defense Cooperation Agreement (DCA) is a bilateral treaty between Finland and the United States on military cooperation and their mutual obligations as NATO member states. The DCA entered into force on September 1, 2024.
The United States shares similar agreements with Bulgaria, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Estonia.


== History ==

Finland had previously joined the NATO military alliance in April 2023 in the wake of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. On February 3, 2023, the President of Finland, Sauli Niinistö, appointed a delegation of military and government officials to negotiate a bilateral defense cooperation agreement with the United States. These negotiations were formally initiated in March 2023. Following the conclusion of the negotiations, the Finnish government proposed to Niinistö in its December 14 general session that Defense Minister Antti Häkkänen, or in his stead Foreign Minister Elina Valtonen, be authorized to sign the DCA. Niinistö accepted the proposal the following day. On December 18, 2023, the agreement was signed by Häkkänen and U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken in a ceremony at the Embassy of Finland in Washington, D.C. 
Following its signing, the DCA was submitted to the Parliament of Finland for review on May 30, 2024. On June 24, 2024, its Constitutional Law Committee announced that approval of the DCA would require a qualified two-thirds majority vote. The only Member of Parliament to oppose the agreement was the Left Alliance's Anna Kontula, who motioned to reject the DCA but was not supported by any other legislators. The DCA was thus unanimously ratified without a vote on July 1, 2024.
The signing of the treaty was met with disapproval by the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, which responded by summoning Finnish Ambassador Antti Helanterä to protest the increased deployment of NATO troops to the Finland–Russia border. The Finnish Ministry for Foreign Affairs replied that Finland had already called a separate meeting regarding the border with Russia.


== Content ==

The purpose of the DCA is to improve military cooperation between Finland and the United States, especially with regards to the advance storage of materiel and the deployment of American troops to Finland. Specifically, Finland granted American troops access to the following military facilities:

The Finnish Border Guard's barracks in Ivalo
The Karelia Air Wing's base at Kuopio Airport in Rissala
The Pori Brigade's garrison in Niinisalo and its nearby Pohjankangas-Hämeenkangas training area
A storage area in Parkano
The Nyland Brigade's garrison in Dragsvik, Raseborg and Syndalen training area in Hanko
The Rovajärvi training area and Misi storage area in Lapland
The Lapland Air Wing's air base and the Jaeger Brigade's garrison, both located in Rovaniemi
A storage area in Skinnarvik, Kimitoön
A storage area in Letku,Tammela
The Satakunta Air Command's air base in Pirkkala
A storage area in Tervola
The Air Force Academy in Tikkakoski
A naval base and garrison in Upinniemi and the island of Russarö, south of Hanko
Storage areas on in Veitsiluoto and the nearby island of Ajos in Kemi
The Karelia Brigade's Vekaranjärvi garrison and Pahkajärvi training area, both in Kouvola
The DCA stipulates that the United States is only responsible for the construction, operation, and maintenance costs of facilities that only American troops use, and will not be charged rent. Meanwhile, facilities shared by the United States Armed Forces and Finnish Defense Forces are funded by each country in proportion to their respective usage. The agreement does not explicitly prohibit nuclear weapons but defers to Finnish law and international agreements, such as the Nuclear Energy Act prohibiting the transit and storage of nuclear weapons in the country. 
Generally, American troops alleged to have committed criminal offenses will be tried by American courts under the DCA. However, if a case is of special importance to Finland, jurisdiction over it can be transferred to Finnish courts on a case-by-case basis. These include "socially significant" crime, sex crime, and crime "against life and health." The United States is also responsible for determining whether specific instances of its military activities are carried out in "connection with an official mission" in Finland.


== See also ==
Agreement on Defense Cooperation between the Czech Republic and the United States of America
Finland–United States relations
Finland–NATO relations


== References ==


== External links ==
Agreement on Defense Cooperation between Finland and the United States of America (in English)