David Marchick (born 1966) is an American attorney, academic, and university administrator who is dean of the Kogod School of Business at American University. He worked in both the Biden and the Clinton administrations. He is the co-author of the book The Peaceful Transfer of Power: An Oral History of America's Presidential Transitions.
After working in the Clinton administration, Marchick joined the law firm Covington & Burling in March 2002. In October 2007, Marchick joined The Carlyle Group, as managing director and its global head of regulatory affairs.


== Early life and education ==
Marchick was born in 1966 and raised in Orinda, California. He attended the College Preparatory School before earning a Bachelor of Arts from the University of California, San Diego in 1988. While at UC San Diego, Marchick was student body president. Marchick later earned a master's degree in public policy at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas in Austin, and a Juris Doctor from the George Washington University Law School in Washington, D.C.


== Career ==


=== 1990s ===
Marchick began to work for the Clinton Administration in 1993, as deputy director of presidential correspondence. Marchick joined the Office of the United States Trade Representative in early 1993. In May 1996, Marchick was appointed by United States Secretary of Commerce Mickey Kantor to deputy assistant secretary for trade development.
By January 1998, Marchick held the position of Deputy United States Assistant Secretary of State. Marchick led negotiations with China to expand air passenger and cargo services between the United States and China.
In October 1999, Marchick left the U.S. State Department to join the newly formed Bid4Assets, a website for bankrupt businesses to auction off their assets.


=== 2000s ===
In March 2002, Marchick joined Covington & Burling, an international law firm. At Covington, Marchick began work on international transportation and trade issues. In 2006, Marchick co-authored the book U.S. National Security and Foreign Direct Investment, and focused his law practice on representing companies, such as IBM, seeking approval from the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS), an inter-agency committee of the United States Government that reviews the national security implications of foreign investments in U.S. companies or operations.
Marchick was vice chair of Covington & Burling's international practice. In October 2007, Marchick joined The Carlyle Group, a Washington, D.C.–based global asset management firm specializing in private equity, as managing director of Carlyle's regulatory affairs. In support of his work on domestic manufacturing investments, Marchick was awarded the "Solidarity and Appreciation Award" by the United Steelworkers.
Marchick retired from the Carlyle Group in December 2018.
After Carlyle, he was Director of the Center for Presidential Transition at the Partnership for Public Service, an adjunct professor at the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth, and Senior Of Counsel at the law firm Covington & Burling. As Director of the Center for Presidential Transition, he worked on a non-partisan basis on the Presidential Transition of 2020.
As Chief Operating Officer of the U.S. International Development Finance Corporation, Marchick was the senior Biden appointee at the agency.
In 2022, he was appointed as the dean of the Kogod School of Business at American University.


== References ==