Erin Elizabeth McKee  is an American diplomat who served as assistant administrator of the United States Agency for International Development for Europe and Eurasia from 2022 to 2025. She served as the United States Ambassador to Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu from 2019 to 2022, following her appointment by President Donald Trump. As of August 2025, McKee is the CEO of Nova Ukraine, a California-based international nonprofit that provides aid and services to people in Ukraine.


== Early life and education ==
McKee is from California. She earned a Bachelor of Arts from the University of California, Davis, and a Master of Arts from University of Washington.


== Career ==
McKee early in her career worked for Morrison–Knudsen, Inc.'s international mining division in the former Soviet Union. She then served as general manager and then executive director for Capital Investment Group's (CIG) Russia operations.
McKee joined the U.S. Foreign Service in 1995. McKee then served at USAID Missions in Kazakhstan, Iraq, Peru, Bolivia, Israel, and Russia. She later became Senior Deputy Assistant Administrator and Chief Human Capital Officer in the USAID Office of Human Capital and Talent Management, and Senior Deputy Assistant Administrator for the Bureau of Policy, Planning, and Learning at USAID headquarters in Washington, D.C. Before becoming ambassador, McKee was Mission Director of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) in Indonesia.
In August 2025, McKee was appointed Chief Executive Officer of Nova Ukraine, a U.S.-based nonprofit organization providing aid to Ukraine.


== Major Accomplishments ==


=== Assistant Administrator for Europe and Eurasia, USAID (2022–2025) ===
McKee led USAID’s Bureau for Europe and Eurasia during a period of heightened geopolitical tension, notably in response to Russian aggression in Ukraine. She was instrumental in developing and implementing strategic frameworks to strengthen democratic institutions, counter malign influence, and support Ukraine’s economic, societal, and political resilience. Under her leadership, USAID deepened its partnerships across the region, focusing on democracy, security, and prosperity, and played a key role in shaping U.S. national security policy in Europe and Eurasia.


=== United States Ambassador to Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu (2019–2022) ===
As Ambassador, McKee strengthened U.S. diplomatic ties and expanded the American presence in the Pacific Islands. She oversaw the construction of a new embassy compound in Papua New Guinea and the reopening of the U.S. Embassy in Honiara, Solomon Islands, symbolizing a renewed and enduring partnership. During her tenure, the embassy staff doubled in size and diversity, with new agencies and resources dedicated to advancing U.S. interests and supporting democratic development in the region. McKee emphasized collaborative victories with local partners, focusing on prosperity, inclusivity, and democratic empowerment.


== Honors and awards ==
McKee received the President's Award for Distinguished Federal Civilian Service in recognition of her achievements within USAID. In September 2025, McKee was honored with the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Alliance for American Leadership at its launch reception in New York City. The award recognized McKee's leadership in American diplomacy and her commitment to supporting democratic institutions and civil society.


== Personal ==
McKee is married and has a child. She speaks Russian, Spanish, and Bahasa Indonesia.


== References ==