Executive Order 14070, officially titled "Continuing to Strengthen Americans' Access to Affordable, Quality Health Coverage," was signed on April 5, 2022, making it the 86th executive order signed by U.S. President Joe Biden. 
The main purpose of the order was to ensure that all Americans have access to affordable, high-quality health care. This executive order was revoked by President Trump on January 20, 2025.


== Provisions ==
The executive order highlights the American Rescue Plan Act's impact on access to medical coverage, including increased marketplace subsidies, options for states to extend postpartum Medicaid coverage, and new incentives for states to expand their Medicaid programs, among other policies according to the administration. In the Build Back Better Act, Democrats in Congress planned to enhance or prolong several of these programs. However, momentum on Capitol Hill slowed, and Biden used the signing of the executive order to call on Congress to act. He requested that Congress prolong the increased marketplace subsidies, fix the Medicaid coverage gap, and allow Medicare to negotiate prescription medication pricing.
In terms of broad policy, President Biden's executive order reiterated his previous order's goals to maintain and expand Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act, as well as to make high-quality health care accessible and affordable to all Americans. The executive order cited statistics to claim that there was still work to be done on this issue, particularly in states that have not expanded Medicaid, and underlines the need to address issues, including underinsurance, medical debt, and patient enrollment in coverage that does not fit their requirements. Under the previous executive order, agencies should continue to assess current agency rules, and make adjustments as needed.
In summary, the directive urges certain agencies, including those in charge of health care, to find methods to expand affordable coverage, enhance quality, strengthen benefits, and increase enrollment. The intention of the order was for the agencies to look into policies that would:
1) Make coverage options and plan selection clearer. 
2) Increase benefits and access to providers. 
3) Strengthen coverage for all consumers. 
4) Make Medicaid, Medicare, and other government-sponsored programs more readily available and affordable. 
5) Mitigate medical debt.


== See also ==
List of executive actions by Joe Biden


== References ==


== External links ==
Federal Register
Executive Order on Ensuring a Lawful and Accurate Enumeration and Apportionment Pursuant to the Decennial Census