"Hind's Hall" is a protest song by American rapper Macklemore, released as a single on May 6, 2024. Written and produced by Macklemore, it expresses support for the pro-Palestinian protests on university campuses that call for divestment from Israel and a ceasefire in the Gaza war.
The song's title is a reference to pro-Palestinian activists' renaming of Hamilton Hall at Columbia University to "Hind's Hall" in honor of Hind Rajab, a five-year-old Palestinian girl killed by Israeli forces in the Gaza Strip. In the song, Macklemore is critical of the United States's funding of Israel; he describes Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territories as apartheid. Additionally, Macklemore announces his opposition to the music industry for their silence on the issue, and to President Joe Biden because of Biden's support for the Israeli government and military.


== Background ==

In 2024, pro-Palestinian protests on university campuses took place across the world, particularly in the United States, as protesters called on their universities to sever links with Israeli entities due to Israel's actions in the Gaza war. Protestor encampments were raided by US police, who arrested more than 2,300 students, many of whom face expulsion and campus bans.
Protests at Columbia University have been prominent. At Columbia, activists occupied Hamilton Hall and renamed the building as "Hind's Hall" in honor of Hind Rajab, a six-year-old Palestinian girl who was killed by Israeli forces in Gaza City along with her relatives and paramedics who came to her rescue. On April 30, 2024, New York police sieged Hamilton Hall and arrested the protesters inside.


== Composition ==

"Hind's Hall" was composed and produced by Macklemore, and samples "Ana La Habibi" by Lebanese singer Fairuz. In his lyrics, Macklemore is critical of the United States' funding of Israel and describes Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territories as apartheid. He also criticizes US politicians' acceptance of donations from pro-Israel lobbying organizations such as Christians United for Israel (CUFI) and the American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC). Macklemore characterizes Israel's military operations during the war as "a genocide", and makes references to the Nakba and the Israeli military's killing of Palestinian children in the Gaza Strip.
Macklemore calls for a ceasefire in the Gaza war. He condemns the music industry's "platform of silence" on the war. He also references the ongoing feud between rappers Drake and Kendrick Lamar, saying he considers it a minor issue compared to the war. Additionally, Macklemore declares President Joe Biden to be complicit in the Israeli government's mass murder of Palestinian civilians, saying "The blood is on your hands, Biden". Macklemore proclaims that he will not vote for Biden in the 2024 United States presidential election, and that he is undecided.
The song also denounces Congress' banning of TikTok, the white supremacy apparent in policing and policy decisions, and the conflation of antisemitism with anti-Zionism. Macklemore quotes the title of the 1988 song "Fuck tha Police" by hip hop group N.W.A.


== Release ==
The single was released on social media on May 6, 2024. Macklemore announced that once the song was available on streaming services, all of the single's proceeds would be donated to UNRWA. Macklemore performed the song live for the first time on May 9, 2024 in New Zealand, saying, "I stand here today and every day forward for the rest of my life in solidarity with the people of Palestine, with an open heart, in the belief that our collective liberation is at stake – that we all deserve freedom in this life of ours". On May 11, the song was made available on major streaming platforms including Spotify, Apple Music, and Amazon Music.
The song's music video includes a photo of a college building spray-painted with the phrase "Free Palastine [sic]". Some internet users erroneously believed the photo was taken at Columbia University and used it to criticize the protesters. The photo was taken of Tabaret Hall at the University of Ottawa in Canada.
On September 21, 2024, Macklemore released a new version of the song titled "Hind's Hall 2", featuring Palestinian and Palestinian American artists Anees, MC Abdul, Amer Zahr, the LA Palestinian Kids Choir, the Lifted! Youth Gospel Choir, and Tiffany Wilson. In the song, he endorsed the Uncommitted National Movement, warning presidential candidate Kamala Harris that she would lose the state of Michigan in the 2024 United States presidential election unless she supported an arms embargo on Israel. All proceeds from this version would be donated to UNRWA.
He performed the song at the Palestine Will Live Forever Festival in Seward Park Amphitheatre in Seattle on September 21, 2024.


== Reception ==
Solcyre Burga in Time called it "the latest addition to the catalog of American protest songs that includes Billie Holiday's "Strange Fruit" and Crosby, Stills, and Nash & Young's [sic] "Ohio." Guitarist Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine tweeted: "Honestly @macklemore’s 'Hind’s Hall' is the most Rage Against The Machine song since Rage Against The Machine." Jill Stein, the Green Party's presidential candidate in 2024, publicly thanked Macklemore for making the song. Reception from social media has been positive, with many users praising Macklemore's use of his platform to protest. Aja Romano of Vox called the song "electrifying" due to its surprise release; they noted that Macklemore's position as a white independent artist has helped him to express himself freely without career-ending consequences, especially considering the song's contentious subject matter.


== Charts ==


== Release history ==


== See also ==
List of anti-war songs
"FDT", anti–Donald Trump protest song with remix featuring Macklemore
Blockout 2024


== References ==


== External links ==
Official video on YouTube
VIDEO: Hind's Hall by Macklemore, The Independent (May 2024)
Official video on Twitter