Kendall Scudder is an American political activist who serves as the current chair of the Texas Democratic Party. Elected at 35 years old, Scudder is one of the youngest chairs of a state political party in the United States.


== Early life ==
Scudder grew up in Bowie County in rural northeast Texas, graduating from Sulphur Springs High School in 2008. Growing up with two moms, he first became involved in politics in the early 2000s, knocking on doors against a campaign to label LGBTQ+ people as unfit to be parents. He later attended Sam Houston State University in  Huntsville, Texas. During his time there, he was involved with political activism and the Texas College Democrats. He graduated with a degree in political science. He later obtained a masters degree in political management from George Washington University.


== Career ==
Scudder's political work began with Texas College Democrats while an undergraduate at Sam Houston State University. 
In 2018, Scudder ran for the Texas Senate, losing in the general election to incumbent Bob Hall. In 2022, he ran in the Democratic Primary Election for  Texas House District 114, failing to advance to the runoff. Scudder served as Vice Chair of Finance for the Texas Democratic Party. In March of 2024, he was elected to the Dallas Central Appraisal District Board of Directors, Pos. 2, a position he held until becoming chairman.
In March 2025, Scudder was elected to the remainder of a four-year term as chair of the Texas Democratic Party at a  State Democratic Executive Committee Meeting in Austin, succeeding incumbent Gilberto Hinojosa. He won the race during the first-round of voting, obtaining 65 out of 121 SDEC votes among seven candidates.
Since being elected, Scudder has taken on many initiatives; including a pledge to hire staff for a Spanish-language communications department. Under his leadership, the Texas Democratic Party moved its office headquarters from Austin to Dallas. Many praised this move as expanding the party's presence within Texas by opening new offices around the state. However, many also criticized the move as bringing turmoil to the party, both by moving the party away from the state capitol as well as prompting many staff to leave.


== References ==