Elizabeth Savetsky (née Blum; born October 1985) is an American social media influencer and pro-Israel activist.


== Early life and education ==
Elizabeth Savetsky (nee Blum) was born in October 1985 and grew up in Fort Worth, Texas. She sang country music, won the Miss Teen Duncanville title and was a runner-up in the 2002 Miss Teen Texas pageant. She first visited Israel at age 18 on a Birthright Israel trip. She earned her undergraduate degree from New York University and her master's degree in education from the University of Pennsylvania.


== Career ==
After graduating, Savetsky worked in fashion PR and maintained a moderately successful blog in the mid-2000s. As readership declined, she shifted to emerging social media platforms like Instagram and Facebook. In 2013, she began her Instagram account focusing on accessories, calling herself “excessoriesexpert". She became the social media director for Seventh House Public Relations and the host of an IGTV series for Jewish matchmaking called “Bashert By Lizzy”.
In November 2022, after she was announced as a cast member on Bravo's Real Housewives of New York, Savetsky said she received a "torrent of antisemitic attacks", and she withdrew from the cast. During the dispute, Savetsky's husband Ira quoted her rival using the N-word, but said the full word, causing discomfort among crew members, which Savetsky later characterized as a "mistake" on his part. Bravo confirmed her departure, describing it as a mutual decision after thoughtful discussions. Executive producer Andy Cohen also confirmed her departure, and told People and Kveller that he had also been subjected to antisemitic trolling on the internet.


== Activism ==
Savetsky has gained recognition for her advocacy of Zionism, opposition to antisemitism, and pro-Israeli advocacy. As of April 2025, she had 415,000 followers on Instagram. She uses her social media platform to advocate for Jewish identity and raise awareness of issues related to Israel. Her activism began during the May 2021 Israel–Palestine crisis when she was encouraged by a friend in Israel to address rising antisemitism on social media. She has since traveled across the United States, speaking to Jewish communities about advocacy and identity. Her content includes interviews with families of hostages from the Gaza war, coverage of alleged antisemitism on college campuses, documentation of her visits to Israel, and religious discussions in her "Torah Corner" series, recorded with her daughter Stella. Her efforts have been described as "focused on Jewish empowerment". Her content frequently features her three children.

After the October 7 attacks, Savetsky walked through New York City in "symbolic, blood-stained clothing" to raise awareness of hostages taken by Hamas from Israel. She has been a vocal supporter of Israel’s military actions in Gaza following the attack by Hamas. Savetsky has shared videos criticizing college protests and opposition to Israel, particularly from Democratic politicians.
In 2024, Savetsky received a citation from New York City Mayor Eric Adams for her efforts in combating antisemitism. The honor was presented at the annual Hanukkah celebration hosted at Gracie Mansion. In January 2025, she was named as a contender for the role of U.S. Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat Antisemitism in the Second cabinet of Donald Trump by the New York Post. She also received the "Voice of Iron" award at a ceremony held at the Knesset in Jerusalem, Israel. The Knesset, Israel's national legislature, presented the award to honor her efforts in defending Israel and amplifying its voice during the Israel-Hamas War.In February 2025, Savetsky posted to her Instagram account a video clip of the far-right politician Meir Kahane, who was convicted of multiple acts of terrorism in the United States and in Israel. Savetsky wrote that "Rabbi Meir Kahane, of blessed memory, was labeled as a violent extremist, but he was right. This is the truth right here. The only language the Arabs understand is force and fear." The post triggered an immediate and mostly negative reaction.
Savetsky also endorsed Trump's proposed plan to remove Palestinians from the Gaza Strip. In a follow-up video and interview, she stated that she endorsed only the specific message she shared, not all of Kahane's views. She also elaborated that she supports the use of force to combat Palestinian terrorism, which motivated her to post the initial video.


== Personal life ==
Savetsky is married to plastic surgeon Dr. Ira Savetsky, with whom she shares three children. Her husband's pro bono work treating victims of the October 7 attacks led to his receiving death threats.
Savetsky has spoken publicly about her struggles with alcoholism.


== Literature ==
Rachel Fink: “The Real Housewives of Hasbara: When the Gaza War Is Good for Business.” In: Haaretz, 6 April 2025.


== References ==