Russell Antonio Goodwin Sr. is an American pastor and Democratic politician from Milwaukee, Wisconsin. He is a member of the Wisconsin State Assembly, representing Wisconsin's 12th Assembly district since 2025. He previously served on the Milwaukee County Board of Supervisors from 2020 to 2022.


== Early life and career ==
Russell Goodwin was raised in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, graduating from Shorewood High School. Goodwin has authored several religious-themed books, and worked as a music producer. He was a founder of Christians United on the Move Church in Milwaukee, now the Movement Center Church, where he still serves as senior pastor. He received an honorary doctorate in divinity in 2015.


== Political career ==
Goodwin made his first bid for public office in 2014, running for Wisconsin State Assembly in a challenge against incumbent Democrat Fred Kessler, but failed to make the ballot. He then ran a write-in campaign for the Republican primary, but fell short of the 1,000 write-in votes needed to make the general election ballot. He received three write-in votes in the general election.
In 2019, Goodwin announced that he would run for the Milwaukee County Board of Supervisors, to succeed supervisor Deanna Alexander, who was not running for re-election. In announcing his campaign, Goodwin said he would dedicate his campaign to the memory of Pastor Silvia Hughes-Twari, who had been killed by a vehicle that was fleeing from Milwaukee police. He was elected without opposition.
In seeking re-election in 2022, Goodwin failed to collect enough valid signatures to appear on the ballot for county board. A number of signatures were disqualified because the signers did not reside in his county board district; Goodwin also suggested that door-to-door signature collection was hampered by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Fortunately for Goodwin, however, no other candidate had planned to run against him, leaving the seat open to a write-in contest. Goodwin sought re-election via write-in, but was defeated by the write-in campaign of his predecessor, Deanna Alexander. In the days after the election, Goodwin initially called for protests at Alexander's home over previous statements that he characterized as racist and anti-LGBT, but later canceled the planned protest.
In December 2022, Goodwin announced a run for Milwaukee Common Council, to succeed Chantia Lewis who had been removed from office as part of a plea agreement. Ultimately seven other candidates also entered the race. Goodwin finished fourth in the nonpartisan primary, behind Odell Ball, the husband of Milwaukee County sheriff Denita Ball, and Milwaukee Public Schools teachers Larresa Taylor and Amber Danyus.
In early 2024, state representative LaKeshia Myers, who had succeeded Fred Kessler in the 12th Assembly district, announced she would forgo re-election in order to run for Wisconsin Senate. Goodwin announced he would seek the Democratic Party's nomination to succeed Myers in the State Assembly. In the overwhelmingly Democratic district, Goodwin won the primary with just 32.6% of the vote. In the general election, Goodwin faced a rematch with his 2022 county board opponent, Deanna Alexander, who was running as an independent. Goodwin easily prevailed in this election, however, receiving over 80% of the vote.


== Personal life and family ==
Russell Goodwin was first married to Niquelle Brimmer. Together, they had three children and experienced the heartbreaking loss of twins due to a miscarriage — a moment that left a lasting imprint on Russell’s heart. Their marriage ended in 2009. He later had a brief marriage to Decorah M. Gordon, which concluded amicably in 2013. Today, Russell is married to Misty Dawn Parker and embraces the role of stepfather to her three children, continuing his lifelong commitment to family and faith.
"Milwaukee County Case Number 2009FA004311 In RE the marriage of Russell A Goodwin Sr and Niquelle A Goodwin". Wisconsin Circuit Court Access. 2009. Retrieved December 16, 2024.
He later married Decorah M. Gordon; the marriage ended in divorce in 2013."Milwaukee County Case Number 2013FA003823 In RE the marriage of Decorah M Gordon and Russell A Goodwin". Wisconsin Circuit Court Access. 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2024.
Russell is now married to Misty Dawn Parker and is a loving stepfather to her three children.


== Electoral history ==


=== Wisconsin Assembly (2014) ===


=== Wisconsin Assembly (2024) ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Campaign website
The Movement Center Church

Profile at Vote Smart
Russell Goodwin at Ballotpedia