The United States Forces Japan (USFJ) (Japanese: 在日米軍, Hepburn: Zainichi Beigun) is a subordinate unified command of the United States Indo-Pacific Command. It was activated at Fuchū Air Station in Tokyo, Japan, on 1 July 1957 to replace the Far East Command. USFJ is headquartered at Yokota Air Base in Tokyo and is commanded by the Commander, U.S. Forces Japan who is also commander of the Fifth Air Force. Since then, it is the first and only sustained presence of a foreign military on Japanese soil in its history.
USFJ oversees U.S. military personnel, assets, and installations in Japan, including approximately 55,000 active-duty servicemembers and 15 major bases. USFJ supports U.S. responsibilities under the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan, and its activities are governed by the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) between the United States and Japan. The command plays a major role in security-related coordination and dialogue with the Government of Japan and the Japan Self-Defense Forces.
In July 2024, the U.S. Department of Defense announced that USFJ would be upgraded to a "joint operational headquarters", a move U.S. Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin characterized as "the most significant change to U.S. Forces Japan since its creation".


== History ==


=== Origins ===

After the Japanese surrender at the end of World War II in Asia, the United States Armed Forces assumed administrative authority in Japan. The Imperial Japanese Army and Navy were decommissioned, and the U.S. Armed Forces took control of Japanese military bases until a new government could be formed and positioned to reestablish authority.Allied forces planned to demilitarize Japan, and the new government adopted the Constitution of Japan with a no-armed-force clause in 1947.
After the Korean War began in 1950, Douglas MacArthur, the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers in Japan, in agreement with the Japanese government, established the paramilitary "National Police Reserve", which was later developed into the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force. It means the de facto remilitarization of postwar Japan.
In 1951, the Treaty of San Francisco, signed by the Allies and Japan, formally ended the state of war with the Allies and restored Japan's formal sovereignty. At the same time, the U.S. and Japan signed the Japan-America Security Alliance, a ten-year renewable agreement. By this treaty, USFJ is responsible for the defense of Japan. As part of this agreement, the Japanese government requested that the U.S. military bases remain in Japan and agreed to provide funds and various interests specified in the Status of Forces Agreement. At the expiration of the treaty, the United States and Japan signed the Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan. The status of the United States Forces Japan was defined in the U.S.–Japan Status of Forces Agreement. This treaty is still in effect, and it forms the basis of Japan's foreign policy.


=== 20th century ===
During the Vietnam War, U.S. military bases in Japan, especially those in the Okinawa Prefecture, were used as important strategic and logistic bases. In 1970, the Koza riot occurred against the U.S. military presence on Okinawa. Strategic bombers were deployed to the bases on Okinawa. Before the 1972 reversion of the island to Japanese administration, it has been speculated but never confirmed that up to 1,200 nuclear weapons may have been stored at Kadena Air Base during the 1960s.


=== 21st century ===
The Japanese government paid ¥217 billion (US$2.0 billion) in 2007 as annual host-nation support called Omoiyari Yosan (思いやり予算; sympathy budget or compassion budget). As of the 2011 budget, such payment was no longer to be referred to as omoiyari yosan or "sympathy budget". Japan compensates 75% ($4.4 billion) of U.S. basing costs.
Immediately after the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami, 9,720 dependents of United States military and government civilian employees in Japan evacuated the country, mainly to the United States.
The relocation of the U.S. Marine Corps Air Station Futenma to Henoko Bay was resolved in December 2013 with the signing of a landfill agreement by the governor of Okinawa. Under the terms of the U.S.-Japan agreement, 5,000 U.S. Marines were relocated to Guam, and 4,000 Marines were sent to other Pacific locations such as Hawaii or Australia,  while around 10,000 Marines were to remain on Okinawa. No timetable for the Marines redeployment was announced, but The Washington Post reported that U.S. Marines would leave Okinawa as soon as suitable facilities on Guam and elsewhere were ready. The relocation move was expected to cost $8.6 billion, including a $3.1 billion cash commitment from Japan for the move to Guam as well as for developing joint training ranges on Guam and on Tinian and Pagan in the Northern Mariana Islands. Certain parcels of land on Okinawa which were leased for use by the American military were supposed to be turned back to Japanese control via a long-term phased return process according to the agreement. These returns have been ongoing since 1972. In October 2020, Marine Corps Base Camp Blaz was activated on Guam. The new base is meant to house Marines relocated from Okinawa, with the final relocation planned for 2025.

In March 2024, media reporting suggested that the organizational remit and status of USFJ would be changed—possibly including the creation of a new joint task force as well as the elevation of the USFJ commander's rank—as part of a broader 'upgrading' of the U.S.-Japan alliance to be announced during the April 2024 visit of Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida to the United States. As part of that visit, Prime Minister Kishida and U.S. President Joe Biden stated the following in a Joint Leaders' Statement: Recognizing the speed at which regional security challenges evolve and to ensure our bilateral Alliance structures meet these critical changes, we announce our intention to bilaterally upgrade our respective command and control frameworks to enable seamless integration of operations and capabilities and allow for greater interoperability and planning between U.S. and Japanese forces in peacetime and during contingencies. More effective U.S.-Japan Alliance command and control will strengthen deterrence and promote a free and open Indo-Pacific in the face of pressing regional security challenges. We call on our respective defense and foreign ministries to develop this new relationship through the Security Consultative Committee (our security "2+2").In July 2024, DOD announced that USFJ would be upgraded to a joint operational headquarters. According to one DOD official, this will result in USFJ transitioning from a primarily "administrative command" into an organization with more operational and warfighting responsibilities.


== United States presence debate ==
As of May 2022, the stationing of U.S. military personnel at military facilities across Okinawa Island remains a hotly-contested and controversial issue, with the relocation of Marine Corps Air Station Futenma often being at the forefront of protests against the presence of U.S. military presence on the island. Okinawa makes up only 0.6% of the nation's land area; yet, approximately 62% of United States bases in Japan (exclusive use only) are on Okinawa. Despite an agreement to relocate Marine Corps Air Station Futenma first being reached by the Japanese and U.S. governments in 1996, progress to relocate the base has stalled because of the protests  as well as environmental concerns resulting from the construction, operation and relocation of the base.
The U.S. government employs over eight thousand Master Labor Contract/Indirect Hire Agreement workers on Okinawa (per the Labor Management Organization), not including Okinawan contract workers.
There is also debate over the Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) since it covers a variety of administrative technicalities blending the systems which control how certain situations are handled between the U.S.'s and Japan's legal framework.


=== Surveys among Japanese ===
In May 2010, a survey of the Okinawan people conducted by the Mainichi Shimbun and the Ryūkyū Shimpō, found that 71% of Okinawans surveyed thought that the presence of Marines on Okinawa was not necessary (15% said it was necessary). When asked what they thought about 62% of exclusive use United States Forces Japan bases being concentrated on Okinawa, 50% said that the number should be reduced and 41% said that the bases should be removed. When asked about the US-Japan security treaty, 55% said it should be a peace treaty, 14% said it should be abolished, and 7% said it should be maintained. Many Okinawans challenge colonial narratives around the foreign military presence and this contributes to the decolonisation on knowledge. Many question if the presence is beneficial for the people. A 2023 research paper in the International Relations of the Asia-Pacific journal found that, Okinawans have "considerably unfavorable attitudes toward the US military presence in their prefecture... regardless of their contact with Americans and economic benefits and their general support for the US military presence within Japan."  Their finding supported a "not-in-my-backyard" reason for the negativity.

Many of the bases, such as Yokota Air Base, Naval Air Facility Atsugi and Kadena Air Base, are located in the vicinity of residential districts, and local citizens have complained about excessive aircraft noise. The 2014 poll by Ryūkyū Shimpō found that 80% of surveyed Okinawans want the Marine Corps Air Station Futenma moved out of the prefecture. On 25 June 2018, Okinawan residents protested against the construction of a new airfield. Activists holding placards and banners went to sea on 70 boats and ships.  Protesters urged the Japanese authorities to stop the expansion of the U.S. military presence on the island. Some of the boats went to the guarded construction site, where they came across the Coast Guard patrol vessels. Some activists were arrested for entering a prohibited zone.
On 11 August 2018, about 70,000 protesters gathered at a park in the prefecture capital of Naha to protest the planned relocation of a U.S. military base on the southern Japanese island. Opponents of the relocation said the plan to move Marine Corps Air Station Futenma from a crowded neighborhood to a less populated coastal site would not only affect the environment, but would also go against local wishes to have the base moved from the island entirely.


=== Crime ===

At the beginning of the occupation of Japan in 1945, many U.S. soldiers participated in the Special Comfort Facility Association. The Japanese government organised the enslavement of 55,000 women to work providing sexual services to U.S. military personnel before the surrender. On discovery of the program, the association was closed by the Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers.
Between 1972 and 2009, U.S. servicemen committed 5,634 criminal offenses, including 25 murders, 385 burglaries, 25 arsons, 127 rapes, 306 assaults, and 2,827 thefts. So called SOFA members constitute around 5.5 percent of Okinawa's population as of 2024. SOFA members were suspected of 1.5 percent of total offences. Of robbery cases, SOFA members made up 20 percent of the total amount of robbery defendants since 1972. Sexual assault cases stood at 9 percent. For murder they made up 2 percent. SOFA members were therefore underrepresented in murder cases but over-represented in sexual assault and robbery cases. According to the U.S.-Japan Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA), which governs how criminal cases are handle, when criminal acts that are committed both off-duty and off-base, are to be prosecuted under the Japanese law.
In 2016,The Japan Times stated that "crimes ranging from rape to assault and hit-and-run accidents by U.S. military personnel, dependents and civilians have long sparked protests in the prefecture." "A series of horrific crimes by present and former U.S. military personnel stationed on Okinawa has triggered dramatic moves to try to reduce the American presence on the island and in Japan as a whole," commented The Daily Beast in 2009.
In 1995, the abduction and rape of a 12-year-old Okinawan schoolgirl by two U.S. Marines and one U.S. sailor led to demands for the removal of all U.S. military bases in Japan. Other controversial incidents include the Girard incident in 1957, the Michael Brown Okinawa assault incident in 2002, the death of the Kinjo family in 1996, and the hit-and-run death of Yuki Uema in 1998. In February 2008, a 38-year-old U.S. Marine based on Okinawa was arrested in connection with the reported rape of a 14-year-old Okinawan girl. This triggered waves of protest against American military presence on Okinawa and led to tight restrictions on off-base activities. Although the accuser withdrew her charges, the U.S. military court-martialed the suspect and sentenced him to four years in prison under the stricter rules of the military justice system.
U.S. Forces Japan designated 22 February as a "Day of Reflection" for all U.S. military facilities in Japan and established the Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Task Force in an effort to prevent similar incidents. In November 2009, Staff Sergeant Clyde "Drew" Gunn, a U.S. Army soldier stationed at Torii Station was involved in a hit-and-run accident of a pedestrian in Yomitan Village on Okinawa. In April 2010, Gunn was charged with failing to render aid and vehicular manslaughter, and he was sentenced to two years and eight months in jail.
In 2013, Seaman Christopher Browning and Petty Officer 3rd Class Skyler Dozierwalker were found guilty by the Naha District Court of raping and robbing a woman in a parking lot in October. Both admitted committing the crime. The case outraged Okinawans and sparked tougher restrictions for all U.S. military personnel in Japan, including a curfew and drinking restrictions.
On 13 May 2013, in a controversial statement, Toru Hashimoto, Mayor of Osaka and co-leader of the Japan Restoration Association said to a senior American military official at the Marine Corps base on Okinawa that "we can't control the sexual energy of these brave Marines." He said that Marines should make more use of the local adult entertainment industry to reduce sexual crimes against local women. Hashimoto also spoke of the necessity of former Japanese Army comfort women and of prostitutes for the U.S. military in other countries such as Korea.
In June 2016, after a civilian worker at the base was charged with murdering a Japanese woman, thousands of people protested on Okinawa. Organizers estimated turnout at 65,000 people, which was the largest anti-base protests on Okinawa since 1995. A Marine was sentenced to four years in prison and hard labour after killing a local while drunk driving. The death sparked a temporary alcohol ban for all the U.S. troops in Japan.
In 2024, a U.S. service member in Okinawa was sentenced to five years in prison for kidnapping and sexual assault of a minor. The case have drawn a lot of attention in the media as well as igniting debate. In 2025, a marine from the United States was sentenced to 7 years in prison for sexual assault in Okinawa.


=== Osprey deployment ===
In October 2012, twelve MV-22 Ospreys were transferred to Marine Corps Air Station Futenma to replace aging Vietnam-era Boeing Vertol CH-46 Sea Knight helicopters. In October 2013, an additional 12 Ospreys arrived. Japanese Defense Minister Satoshi Morimoto explained that the Osprey aircraft is safe, adding that two recent accidents were "caused by human factors". Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda also stated that the Japanese government was convinced of the MV-22's safety. Various incidents involving V-22 Ospreys have occurred on Okinawa. On 5 April 2018, it was announced that the U.S. Air Force would officially deploy CV-22 Osprey aircraft at its Yokota Air Base.


=== Environmental concerns ===

Environmental concerns have taken the forefront of the debate over the presence of U.S. military forces on Okinawa. Since the late 1990s, environmental concerns elevated by both local residents as well as larger Okinawan and Japanese environmental action groups and independent activists have often resulted in public protests and demonstrations against the relocation of existing U.S. military bases and the construction of replacement facilities, which have been labelled by some as examples of "modern colonialism". In particular, lingering environmental concerns over the disruption or destruction of coastal and marine habitats off the shores of Okinawa from construction, relocation and operation of U.S. military bases on Okinawa, has resulted in the protracted and continuing delayal of plans to relocate military facilities, such as Marine Corps Air Station Futenma.


==== Okinawa dugong lawsuit ====
During the late 1990s and early 2000s, initial plans to relocate Marine Corps Air Station Futenma to a new facility located offshore in Henoko Bay were met with strong resistance after sightings of dugong were reported in areas surrounding territory earmarked for the relocated airbase. A critically endangered species, dugong were traditionally fished and hunted throughout Okinawa and the Ryukyu Islands. This drew the attention of local, national and international environmental action groups, who raised concerns that land reclamation projects tied to the construction of an offshore airbase in Henoko Bay would result in the destruction of nearby dugong habitats and coastal ecosystems. Despite this, plans were set forth to continue ahead with the relocation of the base, notably, flouting the results of a 1997 referendum where the majority voted to reject a replacement facility.
In opposition to this, in September 2003, a group of Okinawan, Japanese and U.S. environmental organizations filed a lawsuit in San Francisco Federal Court to protest the relocation of Marine Corps Air Station Futenma. This lawsuit, initially entitled Okinawa Dugong v. Rumsfeld, argued that the U.S. Department of Defense failed to consider the impacts that relocating the base would have upon the local dugong population, in turn, violating the U.S. National Historic Preservation Act. This case was closed in January 2008; notably for the plaintiffs, it was ruled that the Department of Defense, by not considering the impacts of the relocated airbase upon the local dugong population, had in fact violated the National Historic Preservation Act, thus delaying the relocation of the base.


==== Water contamination ====
Concerns over water contamination have also exacerbated recent tensions surrounding the presence of U.S. military bases in Okinawa. In June 2020, following the announcement of an earlier leak of firefighting foam from Marine Corps Air Station Futenma in April 2020, a water quality study conducted by the Japanese Ministry of the Environment published findings of elevated contamination levels of PFOS and PFOA at 37 different water sources near U.S. military bases and industrial areas which exceeded provisional national targets. Further incidents concerning the release of the cancer-inducing toxins also occurred in August 2021, further worsening tensions over the presence of 'alarming' levels of these toxic chemicals.
Subsequent tests around Kadena Air Base, specifically the training site 50 meters west of Dakujaku River, confirmed severe contamination in the water system with PFAS chemicals. These chemicals reach 10s of meters underground while plumes spread for several kilometers from these contaminated training sites flowed into nearby wells and waterways of Dakujaku River and Hija River which contaminated the drinking water of 450,000 residents. These toxic chemicals originate from firefighting foams which contain PFAS and were used at training sites during the 1970s and 80s. However, the U.S. and Japanese governments say that the source of the issue cannot be confirmed.


== Facilities ==


=== List of current facilities ===

The USFJ headquarters is at Yokota Air Base, about 30 km west of central Tokyo.
The U.S. military installations in Japan and their managing branches are as follows:

Camp Smedley D. Butler, Okinawa Prefecture, Yamaguchi Prefectures. (Although these camps are dispersed throughout Okinawa and the rest of Japan they are all under the heading of Camp Smedley D. Butler):
Camp McTureous, Okinawa Prefecture
Camp Courtney, Okinawa Prefecture
Camp Foster, Okinawa Prefecture
Camp Kinser, Okinawa Prefecture
Camp Hansen, Okinawa Prefecture
Camp Schwab, Okinawa Prefecture
Camp Gonsalves (Jungle Warfare Training Center), Okinawa Prefecture
Kin Blue Beach Training Area, Okinawa Prefecture
Kin Red Beach Training Area, Okinawa Prefecture
Higashionna Ammunition Storage Point II
Henoko Ordnance Ammunition Depot
Marine Corps Air Station Futenma, Okinawa Prefecture
Marine Corps Air Station Iwakuni
Camp Fuji, Shizuoka Prefecture
Numazu Training Area, Shizuoka Prefecture
Ie Jima Auxiliary Airfield, Okinawa Prefecture
Tsuken Jima Training Area, Okinawa Prefecture
Joint Use Facilities and Areas
Temporary use facilities and areas are as follows:

On Okinawa, U.S. military installations occupy about 10.4% of the total land usage.  Approximately 74.7% of all the U.S. military facilities in Japan are located on the island of Okinawa.


=== List of former facilities ===
The United States has returned some facilities to Japanese control. Some are used as military bases of the JSDF; others have become civilian airports or government offices; many are factories, office buildings or residential developments in the private sector. Due to the Special Actions Committee on Okinawa, more land on Okinawa is in the process of being returned.  These areas include Camp Kuwae (also known as Camp Lester), MCAS Futenma, areas within Camp Zukeran (also known as Camp Foster) located about 9,900 acres (40 km2) of the Northern Training Area, Aha Training Area, Gimbaru Training Area (also known as Camp Gonsalves), a small portion of the Makiminato Service Area (also known as Camp Kinser), and Naha Port.
Army:

Army Composite Service Group Area (later, Chinen Service Area), Nanjō, Okinawa
Army STRATCOM Warehouse (later, Urasoe Warehouse), Urasoe, Okinawa
Bluff Area (later, Yamate Dependent Housing Area), Yokohama, Kanagawa
Bolo Point Auxiliary Airfield (later, Trainfire Range), Yomitan, Okinawa
Bolo Point Army Annex, Yomitan, Okinawa
Camp Bender, Ōta, Gunma
Camp Boone, Ginowan, Okinawa
Camp Burness, Chūō, Tokyo
Camp Chickamauga, 19th Infantry, Beppu, Oita
Camp Chigasaki, Chigasaki, Kanagawa
Camp Chitose Annex (Chitose I, II), Chitose, Hokkaido
Camp Coe, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Camp Crawford, Sapporo, Hokkaido
Camp Drake, Asaka, Saitama
Camp Drew, Ōizumi, Gunma
Camp Eta Jima, Etajima, Hiroshima
Camp Fowler, Sendai, Miyagi
Camp Fuchinobe (Office Japan, NSAPACREP), Sagamihara, Kanagawa
Camp Hakata, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
Camp Hardy, Ginoza, Okinawa
Camp Haugen, Hachinohe, Aomori
Camp Katakai, Kujūkuri, Chiba
Camp King (later, Omiya Ordnance Sub Depot), Omiya, Saitama
Camp Kokura, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka
Camp Kubasaki (later, Kubasaki School Area), [Nakagusuku, Okinawa]
Camp Loper, Tagajō, Miyagi
Camp McGill, Yokosuka, Kanagawa
Camp McNair, Fujiyoshida, Yamanashi
Camp Mercy, Ginowan, Okinawa
Camp Moore, Kawasaki, Kanagawa
Camp Mower 34th Infantry, Sasebo, Nagasaki
Camp Nara, Nara, Nara
Camp Ojima, Ōta, Gunma
Camp Otsu, Ōtsu, Shiga
Camp Palmer, Funabashi, Chiba 
Camp Schimmelpfennig, Sendai, Miyagi
Camp Stilwell, Maebashi, Gunma
Camp Weir, Shinto, Gunma
Camp Whittington, Kumagaya, Saitama
Camp Wood, 21st Infantry, Kumamoto
Camp Younghans, Higashine, Yamagata
Chibana Army Annex (later, Chibana Site), Okinawa, Okinawa
Chinen Army Annex (later, Chinen Site), Chinen, Okinawa
Chuo Kogyo (later, Niikura Warehouse Area), Wako, Saitama
Deputy Division Engineer Office, Urasoe, Okinawa
Division School Center, Kokura
Etchujima Warehouse, Koto, Tokyo
Funaoka Ammunition Depot, Shibata, Miyagi
Hachinohe LST Barge Landing Area, Hachinohe, Aomori
Hakata Transportation Office, Hakata-ku, Fukuoka
Hamby Auxiliary Airfield, Chatan, Okinawa
Hosono Ammunition Depot, Seika, Kyoto
Iribaru (Nishihara) Army Annex, Uruma, Okinawa
Ishikawa Army Annex, Uruma, Okinawa
Japan Logistical Command (Yokohama Customs House), Yokohama, Kanagawa
Jefferson Heights, Chiyoda, Tokyo
Kanagawa Milk Plant, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Kashiji Army Annex, Chatan, Okinawa
Kishine Barracks, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Kobe Pier No. 6, Kobe, Hyogo
Kobe Port Building, Kobe, Hyogo
Koza Radio Relay Annex (later, Koza Communication Site), Okinawa, Okinawa
Kure Barge Landing Area, Kure, Hiroshima
Lincoln Center, Chiyoda, Tokyo
Moji Port, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka
Nagoya Procurement (Purchasing and Contracting) Office, Nagoya, Aichi
Naha Army Annex (later, Naha Site), Naha, Okinawa
Naha Service Center, Naha, Okinawa
Namihira Army Annex, Yomitan, Okinawa
Negishi Racetrack Area, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Okinawa Regional Exchange Cold Storage (later, Naha Cold Storage), Naha, Okinawa
Okinawa Regional Exchange Dry Storage Warehouse (later, Makiminato Warehouse), Urasoe, Okinawa
Onna Point Army Annex (later, Onna Site), Onna, Okinawa
Oppama Ordnance Depot, Yokosuka, Kanagawa
Ota Koizumi Airfield (Patton Field Air Drop Range), Oizumi, Gunma
Palace Heights, Chiyoda, Tokyo
Pershing Heights (Headquarters, U.S. Far East Command/United Nations Command), Shinjuku, Tokyo
Sakuradani Rifle Range, Chikushino, Fukuoka
Sanno Hotel Officer's Quarter, Chiyoda, Tokyo
Shikotsuko Training Area, Chitose, Hokkaido
Shinzato Communication Site, Nanjo, Okinawa
South Ammunition Storage Annex (later, South Ammunition Storage Area), Yaese, Okinawa
Sunabe Army Annex, Chatan, Okinawa
Tana Ammunition Depot, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Tairagawa (Deragawa) Communication Site, Uruma, Okinawa
Tengan Communication Site, Uruma, Okinawa
Tokyo Army Hospital, Chūō, Tokyo
Tokyo Quartermaster Depot, Minato, Tokyo
Tokyo Ordnance Depot (later, Camp Oji), Kita, Tokyo
U.S. Army Medical Center, Sagamihara, Kanagawa
U.S. Army Printing and Publication Center, Far East, Kawasaki, Kanagawa
U.S. Army Procurement Agency, Japan, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama Center Pier (MSTS-FE), Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama Engineering Depot, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama Motor Command, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama Ordnance Depot, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama POL Depot, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama Servicemen Club, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama Signal Supply Depot, Kawasaki, Kanagawa
Yokohama Signal Maintenance Depot (JLC Air Strip), Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama South Pier, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yomitan Army Annex, Yomitan, Okinawa
Zama Rifle Range, Sagamihara, Kanagawa
Zukeran Propagation Annex (later, Communication Site), Chatan, Okinawa
Navy:

Haiki (Sasebo) Rifle Range, Sasebo, Nagasaki
Inanba Shima Gunnery Firing Range, Mikurajima, Tokyo
Kinugasa Ammunition Depot, Yokosuka, Kanagawa
Koshiba POL Depot, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Ominato Communication Site, Ominato, Aomori
Omura Rifle Range, Omura, Nagasaki
Makiminato Service Area Annex, Urasoe, Okinawa
Minamitorishima Communication Site, Ogasawara, Tokyo
Nagahama Rifle Range, Kure, Hiroshima
Nagai Dependent Housing Area (Admiralty Heights), Yokosuka, Kanagawa
Nagiridani Dependent Housing Area, Sasebo, Nagasaki
Naval Air Facility Naha, Naha, Okinawa
Naval Air Facility Oppama, Yokosuka, Kanagawa
Navy EM Club, Yokosuka, Yokosuka, Kanagawa
Niigata Sekiya Communication Site, Chuo-ku, Niigata
Shinyamashita Dependent Housing Area (Bayside Court), Yokohama, Kanagawa
Sobe Communication Site (NSGA Hanza), Yomitan, Okinawa
Tokachibuto Communication Site, Urahoro, Hokkaido
Tomioka Storage Area, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Tsujido Maneuver Area, Chigasaki, Kanagawa
Yokohama Bakery, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama Beach (Honmoku) Dependent Housing Area, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama Chapel Center, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokohama Cold Storage, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Yokosuka Naval Pier, Yokosuka, Kanagawa
Yosami Communication Site, Kariya, Aichi
Air Force:

Ashiya Air Base (later, ATG Range), Ashiya, Fukuoka
Asoiwayama Liaison Annex, Tobetsu, Hokkaido
Brady Air Base (later, Gannosu Air Station), Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
Chiran Communication Site, Chiran, Kagoshima
Chitose Air Base, Chitose, Hokkaido
Daikanyama Communication Site, Yugawara, Kanagawa
Fuchu Air Station (Headquarters, USFJ/Fifth Air Force, 1957–1974), Fuchu, Tokyo
Funabashi Communication Site, Funabashi, Chiba
Grant Heights Dependent Housing Area, Nerima, Tokyo
Green Park Housing Annex, Musashino, Tokyo
Hachinohe Small Arms Range, Hachinohe, Aomori
Hamura School Annex, Hamura, Tokyo
Haneda Air Base (later, Postal Service Annex), Ota, Tokyo
Hanshin Auxiliary Airfield, Yao, Osaka
Hirao Communication Site, Chuo-ku, Fukuoka
Itami Air Base, Itami, Hyogo
Itazuke Administration Annex (Kasugabaru DHA), Kasuga, Fukuoka
Itazuke Air Base, Hakata-ku, Fukuoka
Johnson Air Base (later, Air Station, Family Housing Annex), Iruma, Saitama
Kadena Dependent Housing Area, Yomitan, Okinawa
Kanto Mura Dependent Housing Area and Auxiliary Airfield, Chofu, Tokyo
Kasatoriyama Radar Site, Tsu, Mie
Kashiwa Communication Site (Camp Tomlinson), Kashiwa, Chiba
Komaki (Nagoya) Air Base, Komaki, Aichi
Kozoji Ammunition Depot, Kasugai, Aichi
Kume Jima Air Station, Kumejima, Okinawa
Kushimoto Radar Site, Kushimoto, Wakayama
Miho Air Base, Sakaiminato, Tottori
Mineoka Liaison Annex, Minamiboso, Chiba
Mito ATG Range, Hitachinaka, Ibaraki
Miyako Jima Air Station, Miyakojima, Okinawa
Miyako Jima VORTAC Site, Miyakojima, Okinawa
Moriyama Air Station, Nagoya, Aichi
Naha Air Base, Naha, Okinawa
Naha Air Force/Navy Annex, Naha, Okinawa
Najima Warehouse Area, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
Niigata Air Base, Niigata, Niigata
Ofuna Warehouse, Yokohama, Kanagawa
Oshima Communication Center, Oshima, Tokyo
Rokko Communication Site, Kobe, Hyogo
Senaha Communications Station, Yomitan, Okinawa (returned to the Japanese government in September 2006)
Sendai Kunimi Communication Site, Sendai, Miyagi
Showa (later, Akishima) Dependent Housing Area, Akishima, Tokyo
Shiroi Air Base, Kashiwa, Chiba
Sunabe Warehouse, Chatan, Okinawa
Tachikawa Air Base, Tachikawa, Tokyo
Tokyo Communication Site (NTTPC Central Telephone Exchange), Chūō, Tokyo
Wajima Liaison Annex, Wajima, Ishikawa
Wajiro Water Supply Site, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
Wakkanai Air Station, Wakkanai, Hokkaido
Washington Heights Dependent Housing Area, Shibuya, Tokyo
Yamada Ammunition Depot, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka
Yokawame Communication Site, Misawa, Aomori
Yozadake Air Station, Itoman, Okinawa
Marines:

Aha Training Area, Kunigami, Okinawa
Camp Gifu, Kakamigahara, Gifu
Camp Hauge, Uruma, Okinawa
Camp Okubo, Uji, Kyoto
Camp Shinodayama, Izumi, Osaka
Gimbaru Training Area, Kin, Okinawa
Ihajo Kanko Hotel, Uruma, Okinawa
Makiminato Housing Area, Naha, Okinawa
Onna Communication Site, Onna, Okinawa
Awase Golf Course, Okinawa Prefecture (returned to the Japanese government in April 2010)
Yaka Rest Center, Kin, Okinawa
Yomitan Auxiliary Airfield, Yomitan, Okinawa (returned to the Japanese government in 2006, parachute drop training ended in March 2001)


== See also ==
United States Military Government of the Ryukyu Islands
United States Civil Administration of the Ryukyu Islands


== Notes and references ==


== External links ==

Brochure:Okinawa Prefectural Government Washington DC Office
United States Forces Japan Archived 14 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine
U.S. Naval Forces Japan
U.S. Forces, Japan  (GlobalSecurity.org)
Overseas Presence: Issues Involved in Reducing the Impact of the U.S. Military Presence on Okinawa, GAO, March 1998
U.S. Military Issues in Okinawa
LMO