Bosch Rexroth AG is an engineering firm based in Lohr am Main in Germany. It is the result of a merger on 1 May 2001, between Mannesmann Rexroth AG and the Automation Technology Business Unit of Robert Bosch GmbH, and is a wholly owned subsidiary of Robert Bosch GmbH.  Bosch Rexroth employs over 31,000 people worldwide, and achieved total revenue of 6.2 billion euro in 2021.
In 2011 Bosch Rexroth acquired the hydraulic motor business formerly owned by Hägglund & Söner. The company maintains a manufacturing base in the Swedish town of Örnsköldsvik that was the home of Hägglund & Söner, and still manufactures products using the Hägglunds brand. 


== Products and markets ==
Bosch Rexroth manufactures products and systems associated with the control and motion of industrial and mobile equipment, including the Hägglunds Drive Systems range shaft-mounted hydraulic motors.
In 2017, the company announced a partnership with Trumpf and Heraeus to build servo valves using the former's TruPrint 5000 laser powder additive manufacturing machines to build a servo valve.


== Elmo Motion Control ==

Elmo Motion Control is an engineering company specializing in developing, producing, and selling hardware and software in motion control. The company wis based in Petah Tikva, Israel. On September 4, 2022, Elmo was fully acquired by Bosch Rexroth.
Elmo Motion Control was established in 1988 by Haim Monhait. Four years later, in 1992, the company expanded its operations by opening its first subsidiary in the United States. In 2008, Elmo acquired and merged with Control Solutions (Pitronot Bakara). In 2015, the company opened an additional production facility in Warsaw, Poland, to meet the growing demand. Over the years, Elmo expanded its global presence by establishing eight additional subsidiaries worldwide. These include operations in China, Europe, and the APAC region. The most recent subsidiary was opened in Singapore in 2019.
Elmo employs over 400 personnel and has its headquarters and manufacturing facilities in Petah Tikva, Israel. The company also has worldwide sales and technical support offices and additional manufacturing facilities.
Elmo's products cater to various industries, such as semiconductors, lasers, robots, drones, life sciences, industrial automation, and extreme environments. Elmo Motion Control provides various servo drives suitable for various motion requirements, from industrial applications that require high precision and power density to extreme applications designed for harsh environments. Since its establishment, Elmo has developed three generations of products, each offering servo drives and motion controllers for both industrial and harsh environments. Platinum's latest product line is touted for its EtherCAT networking precision.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Elmo Motion Control