A chronicle (Latin: chronica, from Greek χρονικά chroniká, from χρόνος, chrónos – "time") is a historical account of events arranged in chronological order, as in a timeline. Typically, equal weight is given for historically important events and local events, the purpose being the recording of events that occurred, seen from the perspective of the chronicler.  A chronicle which traces world history is a universal chronicle. This is in contrast to a narrative or history, in which an author chooses events to interpret and analyze and excludes those the author does not consider important or relevant.
The information sources for chronicles vary. Some are written from the chronicler's direct knowledge, others from witnesses or participants in events, still others are accounts passed down from generation to generation by oral tradition.  Some used written material, such as charters, letters, and earlier chronicles. Still others are tales of unknown origin that have mythical status. Copyists also changed chronicles in creative copying, making corrections or in updating or continuing a chronicle with information not available to the original chronicler.  Determining the reliability of particular chronicles is important to historians.
Many newspapers and other periodical literature have adopted "chronicle" as part of their name. 


== Subgroups ==

Scholars categorize the genre of chronicle into two subgroups: live chronicles, and dead chronicles. A dead chronicle is one where the author assembles a list of events up to the time of their writing, but does not record further events as they occur. A live chronicle is where one or more authors add to a chronicle in a regular fashion, recording contemporary events shortly after they occur. Because of the immediacy of the information, historians tend to value live chronicles, such as annals, over dead ones.
The term often refers to a book written by a chronicler in the Middle Ages describing historical events in a country, or the lives of a nobleman or a clergyman, although it is also applied to a record of public events. The earliest medieval chronicle to combine both retrospective (dead) and contemporary (live) entries, is the Chronicle of Ireland, which spans the years 431 to 911.
Chronicles are the predecessors of modern "time lines" rather than analytical histories. They represent accounts, in prose or verse, of local or distant events over a considerable period of time, both the lifetime of the individual chronicler and often those of several subsequent continuators. If the chronicles deal with events year by year, they are often called annals. Unlike the modern historian, most chroniclers tended to take their information as they found it, and made little attempt to separate fact from legend. The point of view of most chroniclers is highly localised, to the extent that many anonymous chroniclers can be sited in individual abbeys.
It is impossible to say how many chronicles exist, as the many ambiguities in the definition of the genre make it impossible to draw clear distinctions of what should or should not be included. However, the Encyclopedia of the Medieval Chronicle lists some 2,500 items written between 300 and 1500 AD.


== Citation of entries ==
Entries in chronicles are often cited using the abbreviation s.a., meaning sub anno (under the year), according to the year under which they are listed. For example, "ASC MS A, s.a. 855" means the entry for the year 855 in manuscript A of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. The same event may be recorded under a different year in another manuscript of the chronicle, and may be cited for example as "ASC MS D, s.a. 857".


== English chronicles ==
The most important English chronicles are the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, started under the patronage of King Alfred in the 9th century and continued until the 12th century, and the Chronicles of England, Scotland and Ireland (1577–87) by Raphael Holinshed and other writers; the latter documents were important sources of materials for Elizabethan drama. Later 16th-century Scottish chronicles, written after the Reformation, shape history according to Catholic or Protestant viewpoints.


== Cronista ==
A cronista is a term for a historical chronicler, a role that held historical significance in the European Middle Ages. Until the European Enlightenment, the occupation was largely equivalent to that of a historian, describing events chronologically that were of note in a given country or region. As such, it was often an official governmental position rather than an independent practice. The appointment of the official chronicler often favored individuals who had distinguished themselves by their efforts to study, investigate and disseminate population-related issues. The position was granted on a local level based on the mutual agreements of a city council in plenary meetings. Often, the occupation was honorary, unpaid, and stationed for life. In modern usage, the term usually refers to a type of journalist who writes chronicles as a form of journalism or non-professional historical documentation.


=== Cronista in the Middle Ages ===
Before the development of modern journalism and the systematization of chronicles as a journalistic genre, cronista were tasked with narrating chronological events considered worthy of remembrance that were recorded year by year. Unlike writers who created epic poems regarding living figures, cronista recorded historical events in the lives of individuals in an ostensibly truthful and reality-oriented way.
Even from the time of early Christian historiography, cronistas were clearly expected to place human history in the context of a linear progression, starting with the creation of man until the second coming of Christ, as prophesied in biblical texts.


== Lists of chronicles ==
Babylonian Chronicles (loosely-defined set of 25 clay tablets)
Burmese chronicles
Cambodian Royal Chronicles (loosely-defined collection)
List of collections of Crusader sources (most of them chronicles)
List of Danish chronicles
List of English chronicles
List of Hungarian chronicles
List of Rus' chronicles
Muslim chronicles for Indian history
Chronicles of Nepal
Serbian chronicles


=== Alphabetical list of notable chronicles ===

History of Alam Aray Abbasi – Safavid dynasty
Alamgirnama – Mughal Empire
Alexandrian World Chronicle - Greek history of the world until 392 AD
Altan Tobchi - Mongol Empire
Anglo-Saxon Chronicle – England
Annales Bertiniani – West Francia
Annales Cambriae – Wales
Annales Posonienses – Kingdom of Hungary
Annales seu cronicae incliti Regni Poloniae – Poland
Annals of Inisfallen – Ireland
Annals of Lough Cé – Ireland
Annals of the Four Masters – Ireland
Annals of Spring and Autumn – China
Annals of Thutmose III – Ancient Egypt
The Annals of the Choson Dynasty – Korea
Babylonian Chronicles – Mesopotamia
Anonymous Bulgarian Chronicle – Bulgaria
Barnwell Chronicle - England
Bodhi Vamsa – Sri Lanka
Books of Chronicles attributed to Ezra – Israel
Buranji – Ahoms, Assam, India
Bychowiec Chronicle Lithuania
Cāmadevivaṃsa – Northern Thailand
Culavamsa – Sri Lanka
(Chronica Polonorum): see Gesta principum Polonorum
Cheitharol Kumbaba – Manipur, India
Chronica Gentis Scotorum
Chronica Hungarorum – History of Hungary
Chronica seu originale regum et principum Poloniae – Poland
Chronicle of 754 - Spain
Chronicle (Crònica) by Ramon Muntaner – 13th/14th-century Crown of Aragon. Third and longest of the Grand Catalan Chronicles.
Chronicle of Finland (Chronicon Finlandiae) by Johannes Messenius – Finland
Chronicle of Fredegar - France
Chronicle of the Slavs – Europe
Chronicle of Greater Poland – Poland
Chronicle of Jean de Venette – France
Chronicle of the Bishops of England (De Gestis Pontificum Anglorum) by William of Malmesbury
Chronicles of Jerahmeel
Chronicle of the Kings of Alba - Scotland
Chronicle of the Kings of England (De Gestis Regum Anglorum) by William of Malmesbury
Chronicles of Mann - Isle of Man
Chronicon of Eusebius
Chronicon Scotorum – Ireland
Chronicon of Thietmar of Merseburg
Chronicon Paschale - 7th century Greek chronicle of the world
Chronicon Pictum – History of Hungary
Chronographia – 11th century History of the Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantium) by Michael Psellos
Comentarios Reales de los Incas
Conversion of Kartli – Georgia
Cronaca- Chronicle of Cyprus from the 4th up to the 15th century by Cypriot chronicler Leontios Machairas
Cronaca fiorentina – Chronicle of Florence up to the end of the 14th Century by Baldassarre Bonaiuti
Cronicae et gesta ducum sive principum Polonorum – Poland
Crónica Mexicayotl — History of the Incas
Croyland Chronicle – England
Dawn-Breakers (Nabil's Narrative) – Baháʼí Faith and Middle East
Dioclean Priest's Chronicle – Europe
Dipavamsa – Sri Lanka
Divan of the Abkhazian Kings – Georgia
Epic of Sundiata - West Africa
Epitome rerum Hungarorum – History of Hungary
Eric's Chronicle – Sweden
Eusebius Chronicle – Mediterranean and Middle East
Flandria Generosa – a family of genealogy-focused chronicles about the County of Flanders
Fragmentary Annals of Ireland – Ireland
Froissart's Chronicles – France and Western Europe
Galician-Volhynian Chronicle – Ukraine
Georgian Chronicles – Georgia
Gesta Hungarorum – History of Hungary
Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum – History of Hungary
Gesta Normannorum Ducum – Normandy
Gesta principum Polonorum
Grandes Chroniques de France – France
General Estoria by Alfonso X – c. 1275-1284 Castile, Spain.
Henry of Livona Chronicle – Eastern Europe
Historia Ecclesiastica – Norman England
Historia Scholastica by Petrus Comestor - 12th century France
The Historie and Chronicles of Scotland, Robert Lindsay of Pitscottie
História da Província Santa Cruz a que vulgarmente chamamos Brasil – Brazil
History of the Prophets and Kings – Middle East and Mediterranean
Hustyn Chronicle – Eastern Europe
Jami' al-tawarikh by Rashid-al-Din Hamadani - Universal history
Jans der Enikel – Europe and Mediterranean
Jerome's Chronicle – Mediterranean and Middle East
Jinakalamali – Northern Thailand
Joannis de Czarnkow chronicon Polonorum – Poland
Kaiserchronik – Central and southern Europe, Germany
Kampen chronicles: two separate city chronicles of Kampen, Overijssel, titled De annalibus quaedam and Annalia ende andere copien, roughly covering the 1450–1550 period.
Kano Chronicle – Nigeria
Khulasat-ut-Tawarikh by Sujan Rai - History of India
Khwaday-Namag - History of Persia
Kievan Chronicle – 12th-century Kievan Rus', mostly modern Ukraine
Kilwa Chronicle - East Africa
Kojiki - Japan
Lethrense Chronicle – Denmark
Livonian Chronicle of Henry – Livonia
Livonian Rhymed Chronicle – Livonia
Libre dels Feyts – Book of the Deeds by James I of Aragon, first of the Grand Catalan Chronicles
Madala Panji – Chronicle of the Jagannath Temple in Puri, India, related to the History of Odisha
Mainz Anonymous
Mahavamsa – Sri Lanka
Maronite Chronicle – The Levant, anonymous annalistic chronicle in the Syriac language completed shortly after 664.
Manx Chronicle – Isle of Man
Nabonidus Chronicle – Mesopotamia
Nihon Shoki - Japan
Novgorod First Chronicle – Novgorod Republic
Nuova Cronica – Florence
Nuremberg Chronicle
Old Tibetan Chronicle - History of Tibet
Parian Chronicle - Ancient Greece
Paschale Chronicle – Mediterranean
Pictish Chronicle - Scotland
Primary Chronicle – Kievan Rus'
Puranas – India
Rajatarangini – Kashmir
Roit and Quheil of Tyme – Scotland, Adam Abell
Roskildense Chronicle – Denmark
Royal Frankish Annals – Frankish Empire
Scotichronicon – by the Scottish historian Walter Bower
Shahnama-yi-Al-i Osman by Fethullah Arifi Çelebi – Ottoman Empire (1300 ac – the end of Sultan Suleyman I's reign) which is the fifth volume of it Süleymanname
Skibby Chronicle – Danish Latin chronicle from the 1530s
Solomon bar Simson Chronicle
Swiss illustrated chronicles – Switzerland
Timbuktu Chronicles – Mali
Zizhi Tongjian – China


=== Rhymed chronicles ===
Rhymed or poetic chronicles, as opposed to prosaic chronicles, include:

Rhymed Chronicle of 1682
Rhymed Chronicle of Armenia Minor
Cronache aquilane ("Chronicle of L'Aquila"), both in prose and verse form
Brabantsche Yeesten (c. 1315–1351) by Jan van Boendale (continued by an anonymous author)
Cornicke van Brabant (1415) by Hennen van Merchtenen
Cronijck van Brabant (c. 1435–1460), anonymous, until 1430
Rhymed Chronicle of Brunswick
Rhymed Chronicle of Cologne by Gottfried Hagen
Chronicle of Dalimil
Danish Rhymed Chronicle
Chronicon Egmundanum
Engelbrekt's Chronicle
Erik's Chronicle
Rhymed Chronicle of Flanders, part of the Comburg Manuscript. It is unique, as all other surviving Dutch-language chronicles of Flanders were written in prose.
Die olde Freesche cronike (1474), anonymous history of Friesland until 1248
Rhymed Chronicle of Gandersheim
Rhymed Chronicle of Holland by Melis Stoke
Karl's Chronicle
Rhymed Chronicle of Kastl (Kastler Reimchronik)
Rhymed Chronicle of Klaas Kolijn, notorious 17th-century forgery pretending to be written in the 12th century
Livonian Rhymed Chronicle
Rhymed Chronicle of Mecklenburg by Ernest of Kirchberg
Chronique métrique de Philippe le Bel or Chronique rimée (1316) by Geoffrey of Paris
Chronique rimée (c. 1250) by Philippe Mouskes
New Prussian Chronicle by Wigand of Marburg (1326); only about 500 lines of the 17,000 original lines in rhymed Middle High German have survived
translated into Latin prose as Chronica nova Prutenica by Konrad von Gesselen
Roman de Brut by Wace
Spieghel Historiael by Jacob van Maerlant
Sture's Chronicle
Styrian Rhymed Chronicle
Rhymed Chronicle of Utrecht (c. 1378)
Rhyming Chronicle of Worringen


== See also ==
Books of Chronicles
Medieval Chronicle Society


== References ==


== External links ==
Bémont, Charles (1911). "Chronicle" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 6 (11th ed.). pp. 298–299.
Avonds, Piet (1988). "Van Keulen naar Straatsburg. Jan van Heelu's rijmkroniek over de slag bij Woeringen (1288)". Literatuur: Tijdschrift over Nederlandse Letterkunde (in Dutch). 5 (1): 196–204.
Stein, Robert (2021). "Levend verleden: de Cronijck van Brabant". In van Anrooij, W.; Verbij-Schillings, J. (eds.). Werken van Gelre (in Dutch). Hilversum: Verloren. pp. 299–315. hdl:1887/3247548. Retrieved 27 June 2024.