The Herzegovina uprising (Serbian: Херцеговачки устанак), also known as Vukalović's Uprising, was an uprising by ethnic Serbs in the Herzegovina region against the Ottoman Empire between 1852 and 1862. It was led by chieftain Luka Vukalović. 


== Background ==
After the execution of Ali-paša Rizvanbegović, who had made efforts to promote agriculture and revive the economy of the Herzegovina Eyalet under his rule, the eyalet was abolished and merged back into the Bosnia Eyalet.
In March 1852, Ottoman general Omar Pasha, decided to disarm the Herzegovinians. The resulting outrage among Herzegovinians, together with violent incidents between them and Bosniak Muslims, prompted the uprising by Herzegovinians, led by Luka Vukalović as their chieftain.


== Uprising ==

The uprising began in winter 1852/53, when the Grahovljani, Banjani and Drobnjaci refused to pay the Kharaj and the Jizya, taxes imposed by the Ottoman government. As Ottoman actions against Montenegro began, East Herzegovinian clans fought alongside Montenegrins. Though there were no major engagements between 1853 and 1857, France and Austria followed events with interest. The uprising intensified in December 1857, after Knez Danilo, bitter at the Porte because of its statements in the Paris Congress in 1856, began backing the uprising.
After the Battle of Grahovac on May 1, 1858, when Montenegrin and Herzegovinian rebels defeated the Turks, Knez Danilo named Vukalović the voivode of Zubac, Kruševica, Dračevica and Sutorina, giving him some autonomy.
The Porte pursued a policy of appeasement, recognizing Montenegro's independence. As the great part of East Herzegovina, except Grahovo, part of Banjani, Drobnjaci, Župa and Nikšič Rudina was left under Ottoman rule, Vukalović continued the uprising. The effects were felt in Bosnia, where revolts occurred in Bosanska Krajina and Posavina in 1858. Afraid that the uprising would spill over in its territory, Austria watched with increased concern and assisted the Turks.
Vukalović's pronouncements addressed not only economic problems in Herzegovina, but also the Herzegovinian aspiration for union with Montenegro. His nationalist appeals, perhaps inspired by the efforts of Garibaldi in nearby Italy, increased the anxieties of the great powers of Europe, some of whose consulates tried to help the Ottoman government capture Vukalović.
After 1861, Omer-paša tried in many ways to end the uprising, at first without success. But the Turkish victory in 1862 in its war with Montenegro ended Montenegrin support for the rebellion in Herzegovina. Vukalović, his forces and people strained, then wrote to Omer-paša, who promised amnesty for all rebels.


== Aftermath ==
Omer-paša promised Vukalović that he would continue his office as voivode of Zubac, Kruševica, Dračevica and Sutorina, but he instead appointed Vukalović bimbaša of 500 pandurs who would secure peace along the borders. In 1865, after it had become apparent that the Turks would provide no relief from taxes or feudal duties, Vukalović tried to start another uprising, but was unsuccessful. Vukalović left his birthplace and migrated to Russia, where he died in 1873.


== See also ==
Montenegrin–Ottoman War (1852–53)
Epirus Revolt of 1854


== References ==


== Sources ==

Bataković, Dušan T. (1996). The Serbs of Bosnia & Herzegovina: History and Politics. Dialogue Association. "The Uprisings in Herzegovina, 1852-1862"
Nebojša Bogunović (10 December 2013). Iz srpske istorije. eBook Portal. pp. 94–. GGKEY:TEEA3BSLU7B.
Dušan M. Berić; Milorad Ekmečić (1994). Ustanak u Hercegovini 1852-1862. Srpska akademija nauka i umetnosti.
Vladimir Stojančević (1971). Južnoslovenski narodi u Osmanskom Carstvu od Jedrenskog mira 1829. do Pariskog kongresa 1856. godine. Izdavačko-štamparsko preduzeće PTT.
Pregled istorije jugoslovenskih naroda: Od 1849.g. do 1959g. Zavod za izdavanje Republike Srbije. 1960.