The Woollen Manufacture Act 1809 (49 Geo. 3. c. 109) was an act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that repealed enactments relating to the manufacture of wool in the United Kingdom. The act deregulated the wool industry, heralding the transition from workshops to mills.


== Background ==
The committee appointed to consider of the state of the woollen manufacture of England reported on 19 May 1808, resolving to repeal various old acts relating to the manufacture of wool in the United Kingdom.


== Passage ==
Leave to bring in the Woollen Manufactures Bill to the House of Commons was granted to the Vice-President of the Board of Trade, George Rose , William Wilberforce  and Lord Viscount Milton on 13 April 1809. The bill had its first reading in the House of Commons on 14 April 1809, presented by the Vice-President of the Board of Trade, George Rose . The bill had its second reading in the House of Commons on 2 May 1809 and was committed to a committee of the whole house, which met on 9 May 1809 and 19 May 1809 and reported on 25 May 1809, with amendments. The amended bill had its third reading in the House of Commons on 31 May 1809 and passed, with amendments.
The bill had its first reading in the House of Lords on 1 June 1809. The bill had its second reading in the House of Lords on 6 June 1809 and was committed to a committee of the whole house, which met and reported on 7 June 1809, without amendments. The bill had its third reading in the House of Lords on 13 June 1809 and passed, without amendments.
The bill was granted royal assent on 15 June 1809.


== Provisions ==
Section 1 of the act repealed 32 enactments, listed in that section.

Section 2 of the act repealed 6 enactments, listed in that section.

Section 3 of the act provided that nothing in the act would invalidate any existing or future apprenticeship contracts in the woollen manufacturing trades for legally permitted periods, though such apprenticeships would not be required as a qualification for working in the woollen industry either as a master or journeyman.
Section 4 of the act provided that nothing in the act should be construed to revive any previously repealed acts or parts of acts, and that all such previously repealed legislation would remain repealed as if the current act had not been made.
Section 5 of the act provided that any persons who had served apprenticeships in the woollen manufacturing trade, as well as their wives and children, could practice their trade or any other trade in any town or place within Great Britain without restriction. It protected them from legal action based on local bylaws or the Statute of Artificers 1562 (5 Eliz. 1. c. 4) restricting trade practices. It further specified that if such persons were prosecuted, they could use their apprenticeship as a defense, and anyone bringing unsuccessful suits against them would be liable for double the normal legal costs.
Section 6 of the act provided that provided that any two or more Justices of the Peace could summon a person (or their wife or child) who was setting up a trade to appear before them and make an oath about their place of legal settlement. The Justices were required to provide an attested copy of this affidavit to the person, which could then be used as evidence of their legal settlement in future proceedings before Justices of the Peace at General or Quarter Sessions.
Section 7 of the act provided that if a person (or their wife or child) was summoned again to make the same oath regarding legal settlement, they could present the attested copy of their previously taken oath instead and would not be required to take another oath, though they must leave a copy of the attested copy if required.
Section 8 of the act provided that that nothing in the act would prejudice the privileges of the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, nor would it allow anyone to set up as a vintner or sell wine or other liquors within those universities without first obtaining a license from the respective Vice Chancellor.
Section 9 of the act provided that nothing in the act would extend to or affect the city of London, nor would it alter any of the existing laws and customs related to apprentices in that city.


== Legacy ==
The Woollen Manufacture Act 1810 (50 Geo. 3. c. 83), passed in the year following the act, further repealed 4 enactments related to the manufacture of wool in the United Kingdom.
The qualified terms of the repeal led to several acts being repealed by later acts, including:

City of London Courts of Justice Act 1815 (55 Geo. 3. c. xciii)
Repeal of Obsolete Statutes Act 1856 (19 & 20 Vict. c. 64)
Statute Law (Ireland) Revision Act 1872 (35 & 36 Vict. c. 98)
The whole act was repealed by section 1 of, and the schedule to, the Statute Law Revision Act 1872 (No. 2) (35 & 36 Vict. c. 97).


== Notes ==


== References ==