Aleph Alpha GmbH is a German artificial intelligence (AI) startup company.
Aleph Alpha attempts to achieve independence from US companies and comply with European data protection regulations. It develops large language models (LLM), which try to provide transparency of its sources used for the results generated and are intended for enterprises and governmental agencies only. Training of its chatbot has been done in five European languages.


== History ==
Aleph Alpha was founded in 2019 by Jonas Andrulis and Samuel Weinbach.


== Funding ==
After securing €5.3 million in seed funding in 2020, Aleph Alpha raised an additional €23 million in a second round of financing in 2021, backed by several European venture capital firms.
In a financing round in November 2023, German companies Schwarz Gruppe and Dieter Schwarz Foundation, with the Innovation Park Artificial Intelligence (IPAI), participated as the co-lead investors along with Bosch, SAP, Hubert Burda Media, Christ&Company Consulting, and Hewlett Packard Enterprise. The round raised a total of $500 million.


== Products ==


=== Luminous ===
Aleph Alpha developed its own AI language model, Luminous, based on its own research and codebase with the architecture of generative pre-trained transformers (GPT) and self-supervised learning. Along with the standard functionality all GPT models share, Aleph Alpha contributed some proprietary innovation:

In 2021, they were the first team to offer multimodality, or the ability to prompt their models with any combination of text and images. The innovation behind this capability was published at the leading AI conference EMNLP 2022 and open-sourced under the name MAGMA.
In 2022, they were the first team to develop the ability to create images based on multimodal input. This method has been published at NeurIPS 2023 under the name Multifusion.
With an innovation called AtMan published at NeurIPS 2023, they developed a method to make the patterns learned by GPT models to create results visible and controllable. This methods addressed the problem that generative AI had been a black box before. It created interest from enterprises and governments to address complex and critical problems where chatbots are sometimes insufficient, making AI generated results more trustworthy.
As a tool to build and train its foundation models, the HPE Machine Learning Development System is used. Using the GPT-type concept allows for adaptation and fine-tuning of the foundation model to various applications.
Luminous is already used for the citizen information system, Lumi, for the city of Heidelberg.


== Partnerships ==
For R&D, Aleph Alpha is working with the University of Duisburg-Essen and the Technical University of Darmstadt. It is also participating in open-source organizations such as EleutherAI, a collective of researchers working to increase accessibility to AI research.
Both Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE) and SAP have entered non-exclusive partnerships with Aleph Alpha. In the case of HPE, it is the first partnership of this kind. HPE will offer Luminous on its Greenlake platform.


== Criticism ==
There is criticism of the technology and its financing. In the summer of 2024, a blogger questioned the amount of a 500 million dollar financing round publicly communicated by Aleph Alpha, which appeared to be significantly higher than the funds actually raised. Research by the trade press subsequently revealed that only 110 million euros of the total volume was genuine equity financing. A further 300 million euros had flowed into research funding for the company subsidiary Aleph Alpha Research, as well as 60 million euros in the form of order commitments. Meanwhile, the internal sales target of 6 million US dollars for 2023 had not been achieved: According to the 2023 financial statements, the company had not even been able to show a turnover of one million euros, while the loss amounted to 18.9 million euros.


== See also ==
ChatGPT
General Data Protection Regulation
AI alignment


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Maximilian Sachse: Ramin Mirza: Aleph Alpha rüstet im Vertrieb auf. In: Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 2023-07-05 (in German). Retrieved 2023-11-11
Ulrich Hottelet: Interview: Aleph Alpha fordert vertrauenswürdige KI mit europäischen Werten. heise online, 2023-06-24 (in German). Retrieved 2023-11-11