Andrew Zisserman  (born 1957) is a British computer scientist and a professor at the University of Oxford, and a researcher in computer vision. As of 2014 he is affiliated with DeepMind.


== Education ==
Zisserman received the Part III of the Mathematical Tripos, and his PhD in theoretical physics from the Sunderland Polytechnic.


== Career and research ==
In 1984, he started to work in the field of computer vision at the University of Edinburgh. Together with Andrew Blake they wrote the book Visual reconstruction published in 1987, which is considered one of the seminal works in the field of computer vision. According to Fitzgibbon (2008) this publication was "one of the first treatments of the energy minimisation approach to include an algorithm (called "graduated non-convexity") designed to directly address the problem of local minima, and furthermore to include a theoretical analysis of its convergence."
In 1987, he moved back to England to the University of Oxford, where he joined Mike Brady's newly founded robotics research group as a University Research Lecturer, and started to work on multiple-view geometry. According to Fitzgibbon (2008) his "geometry was successful in showing that computer vision could solve problems which humans could not: recovering 3D structure from multiple images required highly trained photogrammetrists and took a considerable amount of time. However, Andrew's interests turned to a problem where a six-year-old child could easily beat the algorithms of the day: object recognition."


=== Publications ===
Zisserman has published several articles, some of the most highly cited works in the field, and has edited a series of books. A selection:


== Awards and honours ==
Zisserman is an ISI Highly Cited researcher. He is the only person to have been awarded the Marr Prize three times, in 1993, in 1998, and in 2003. He was elected Fellow of the Royal Society in 2007. In 2008 he was awarded BMVA Distinguished Fellowship. In 2013 he received the Distinguished Researcher Award at ICCV. Zisserman received the 2017 Royal Society Milner Award “in recognition of his exceptional achievements in computer programming which includes work on computational theory and commercial systems for geometrical images.”


== References ==