Cognition AI, Inc. (also known as Cognition Labs), doing business as Cognition, is an artificial intelligence (AI) company headquartered in San Francisco in the U.S. state of California. The company developed Devin AI, an AI software developer.
The company is known for hiring competitive programmers such as Gennady Korotkevich and Andrew He.


== Background ==
Cognition was founded in August 2023 by Scott Wu, Steven Hao, and Walden Yan. All three were competitive programmers who won gold medals at the International Olympiad in Informatics (IOI).
Originally, the company was focused on cryptocurrency, before moving to AI as it became a trend in Silicon Valley following the release of ChatGPT. 
In March 2024, Cognition released a demo of its AI coding tool, Devin AI, which was said to be able to perform the tasks of a software engineer.
Cognition boasted that its 10-person team as of March 2024 has won a total of 10 IOI gold medals. Apart from its founders, other members of the team who are gold medalists include Wu's brother Neal, Gennady Korotkevich and Andrew He. Wu stated this background gives Cognition an edge in AI competition as teaching an AI to be a programmer is a very deep algorithmic problem that requires the system to make complex decisions.
With regards to fundraising, the company was backed by Peter Thiel's Founders Fund which provided $21 million of funding to it in early 2024, valuing the company at $350 million. In April 2024, Founders Fund led a $175 million investment into Cognition valuing the company at $2 billion making it a Unicorn.
In May 2024, it was announced that Cognition partnered with Microsoft to integrate Devin AI and would be powered by Microsoft Azure. It received a mixed reaction from users online. While Devin AI was considered promising, there were concerns about job displacement and the actual capabilities of Devin AI.
In March 2025, Cognition reached a valuation of $4 billion after a new funding round led by Joe Lonsdale's 8VC.
In April 2025, Cognition released Devin 2.0, which features an integrated development environment designed for AI agent collaboration. It comes with a new plan starting at $20.
In July 2025, Cognition signed a definitive agreement to acquire Windsurf, an agentic IDE, after the fallout from Google's $2.4 billion acquihire of their CEO and other senior employees. After the acquisition, Cognition was valued at $10 billion in September 2025.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website