Devin AI is an autonomous artificial intelligence assistant tool created by Cognition Labs. Branded as an "AI software developer", the demo tool is designed to complete software development tasks. The tool has received praise, concern, and skepticism over implications surrounding the future of artificial intelligence and software development.


== Background ==

Devin AI was created by Cognition Labs, a startup company consisting of ten members including CEO Scott Wu and chief technology officer Steven Hao, with funding from Peter Thiel's Founders Fund firm. Several of the members had participated in competitive coding contests before forming the company. The members developed the software via a combination of training large language models akin to OpenAI's GPT-4 with aspects from reinforcement learning. According to a Bloomberg article, Cognition Labs claimed that Devin AI represents a "breakthrough in a computer's ability to reason." Devin AI has also been considered part of a trend surrounding the advent of autonomous AI agents that can take direct action to solve problems.


== Abilities ==
Devin AI has been noted for its ability to perform software engineering tasks autonomously. Compared to the GitHub Copilot tool, the software can code, debug, plan and problem solve via machine learning techniques. Devin AI works through a user prompting the software with a task in natural language, with the software responding by showing its plan while implementing the code. It searches online resources during the process to learn to complete a task. The software also takes prompts from users during the implementation process and adjusts its plans accordingly, such as when a user notices an issue or bug.
One application of Devin AI is website creation. A test conducted by Bloomberg revealed that the tool could create a website within ten minutes and could recreate a Pong website in a similar timeframe. In a demo from Cognition Labs, the tool also created a website based on the Llama 2 language model through plan, source code and benchmark testing generation. Other examples include building a project to display images from a blog post, and compiling a computer vision model from an Upwork project. In a benchmark test for analyzing the performance of large language models on real world projects, Devin was found to fix 13.86 percent of encountered issues with no human assistance, compared to an average of 1.96 percent and 4.8 percent for an unassisted and assisted model, respectively.
Later revisions of Devin got multi-agent operation capability, where one of the AI agents dispatch task to other AI agents. Even later versions got self-assessed confidence evaluation, asking for clarification when it is not confident enough to perform the task as assigned. 


=== Search and documentation tool ===
In early 2025, Devin got a machine generated software documentation feature called Devin Wiki, along with an interactive search&answer engine to query on the code, called Devin Search.  A later release opened up these two features to non-subscribers, and this non-subscription version is called DeepWiki. 


== Reception ==
Devin AI has been met with praise, concern and skepticism from journalists and software engineers. Its announcement on X led to praise from investors and software engineers while spawning various memes. Along with the company, the tool has seen optimism amongst AI enthusiasts and anticipation for its public availability. The tool has also been noted for potentially allowing users of a non-technical background to create projects, and aiding developers in solving more complex tasks. The Indian Express claimed that its capabilities could streamline the software development process while avoiding human error. CEO Aravind Srinivas of Perplexity.ai offered praise to Devin, claiming that it "seemed to be 'the first demo of any agent, leave alone coding, that seems to cross the threshold' of human capability." After the release of Devin AI, Cognition Labs experienced increasing growth and interest. Earlier this year, the startup raised $21 million in a deal valuing it at $350 million. It then turned down offers valuing it at $1 billion. According to the Wall Street Journal, the company has been in talks with investors for a deal that would value it at up to $2 billion.
Concern for the software includes its implications for the future of AI and the software development industry. In the wake of layoffs within the tech industry throughout 2023 and 2024, discourse of the tool involves concerns that it may replace engineers and remove lower-level jobs. On social media, various developers expressed criticism for the software's capabilities and potential to incite job layoffs. Skepticism also emerged that the tool may struggle to complete tasks with more intricate requirements and scenarios that would necessitate human creativity, along with its efficiency. Further skepticism regarding its accuracy has emerged following the tool's promotional videos, such as its performance of Devin AI's execution of the Upwork project; YouTube channels such as Internet of Bugs and Computer Vision Project criticized the tool for failing to deliver on the project request, instead writing, testing, and debugging code irrelevant to the Upwork request. However, the tool has also been regarded to encourage software engineers to perform more creative work. Following Devin's debut, various AI software engineering models have been released, such as free and open source replacements like OpenDevin (now called OpenHands)  and Devika, and Genie by San Francisco-based startup Cosine.


== See also ==
ChatGPT
GitHub Copilot
Workplace impact of artificial intelligence
Manus
Vibe coding


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website