The environmental impact of artificial intelligence includes substantial electricity consumption for training and using deep learning models, and the related carbon footprint and water usage. Moreover, the artificial intelligence (AI) data centers are materially intense, requiring a large amount of electronics that use specialized mined metals and which eventually will be disposed as e-waste. 
Some scientists argue that AI may also provide solutions to environmental problems, such as material innovations, improved grid management, and other forms of optimization across various fields of technology.
As the environmental impact of AI becomes more apparent, governments have begun instituting policies to improve the oversight and review of environmental issues that could be associated with the use of AI, and related infrastructure development.


== Carbon footprint and energy use ==


=== Individual level ===

A request made via ChatGPT, an AI-based virtual assistant, uses 10 times as much electricity as a Google Search. Microsoft and Meta had similar increases in their carbon footprint, similarly attributed to AI.
Researchers at the University of Michigan measured the energy consumption of various Meta Llama 3.1 models released in 2024 and found that smaller language models (8 billion parameters) use about 114 joules (0.03167 Wh) per response, while larger models (405 billion parameters) require up to 6,700 joules (1.861 Wh) per response. This corresponds to the energy needed to run a microwave oven for roughly one-tenth of a second and eight seconds, respectively.
According to researchers the median Google Gemini text prompt in 2025 consumes about 0.24 Wh of electricity. Google’s improvements in software efficiency and its clean-energy procurement, have reduced energy use by a factor of 33 and carbon emissions by a factor of 44 for a typical prompt over a year. In practical terms, the median Gemini text prompt uses roughly as much energy as watching nine seconds of television.
Once the model is trained, it consumes significantly less energy, however it still requires a relatively high amount of electricity. Researchers have estimated that a ChatGPT query consumes about five times more electricity than a simple web search. In June 2025, OpenAI executive Sam Altman stated that the average ChatGPT query used about 0.34 Wh (1.2 kJ) of electricity and 8.5×10−5 US gal (0.32 ml) of water.
According to a study by Luccioni, Jernite and Strubell (2024), simple classification tasks performed by AI models consume on average 0.002 to 0.007 Wh per prompt (about 9% of a smartphone charge for 1,000 prompts). Text generation and text summarization each require around 0.05 Wh per prompt on average, while image generation is the most energy-intensive, averaging 2.91 Wh per prompt. The least efficient image generation model used 11.49 Wh per image, roughly equivalent to half a smartphone charge.
A 2024 Scientific Reports study compared estimated carbon impacts of human writers and artists to those of select AI systems, and calculated that humans have 130 to 2900 times higher carbon impact. A 2025 study criticized that comparison based on differences in output quality, and found a counterexample in completing programming tasks with GPT-4, which had a carbon impact 5 to 19 times more than human programmers.


=== System level ===


==== Carbon footprint ====

AI has a significant carbon footprint due to growing electricity consumption, especially due to training and usage. Researchers have argued that the carbon footprint of AI models during training should be considered when attempting to understand the impact of AI. One study suggested that by 2027, energy costs for AI could increase to 85–134 Twh, nearly 0.5% of all current electricity usage. Training large language models (LLMs) and other generative AI generally requires much more electricity compared to running a single prediction on the trained model. Using a trained model repeatedly, though, may easily multiply the electricity costs of predictions. The computation required to train the most advanced AI models doubles every 3.4 months on average, leading to exponential power usage and resulting carbon footprint.Additionally, artificial intelligence algorithms running in places predominantly using fossil fuels for energy will exert a much higher carbon footprint than places with cleaner energy sources. These models may be modified for less environmental impacts at the cost of accuracy, emphasizing the importance of finding the balance between accuracy and environmental impact.
Recent research has shown that developing and training large language models can produce significant environmental impacts, including approximately 493 metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions and 2.77 million liters of water use when considering the full lifecycle from hardware manufacturing to model training.
BERT, a language model trained in 2019, required "the energy of a round-trip transcontinental flight" to train. GPT-3 released 552 metric tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere during training, "the equivalent of 123 gasoline-powered passenger vehicles driven for one year". Much of the energy cost is due to inefficient model architectures and processors. One model named BLOOM, from Hugging Face, trained with more efficient chips and, therefore, only released 25 metric tons of CO2. Incorporating the energy cost of manufacturing the chips for the system doubled the carbon footprint, to "the equivalent of around 60 flights between London and New York." Operating BLOOM daily was estimated to release the equivalent carbon footprint as driving 54 miles.
Algorithms which have lower energy costs but run millions of times a day can also have significant carbon footprints. The integration of AI into search engines could multiply energy costs significantly. Another estimate found that integrating ChatGPT into every Google search query would use 10 TWh each year, the equivalent yearly energy usage of 1.5 million European Union residents.
Increased computational demands from AI caused both increased water and energy usage, leading to significantly more demands on the grid. Due to increased energy demands from AI-related projects, coal-fired plants in Kansas Cityand West Virginia pushed back closing. Other coal-fired plants in the Salt Lake City region have pushed back retirement of their coal-fired plants by up to a decade. Environmental debates have raged in both Virginia and France about whether a "moratorium" should be called for additional data centers. In 2024 at the World Economic Forum, Sam Altman gave a speech in which he said that the AI industry can only grow if there is a major technology breakthrough to increase energy development.
Carbon footprints of AI models depends on the energy source used, with data centers using renewable energy lowering their footprint. Many tech companies claim to offset energy usage by buying energy from renewable sources, though some experts argue that utilities simply replace the claimed renewable energy with increased non-renewable sources for their other customers. Analysis of the carbon footprint of AI models remains difficult to determine, as they are aggregated as part of datacenter carbon footprints, and some models may help reduce carbon footprints of other industries, or due to differences in reporting from companies.
Some applications of ML, such as for fossil fuel discovery and exploration, may worsen climate change. Use of AI for personalized marketing online may also lead to increased consumption of goods, which could also increase global emissions.
Critics have highlighted that AI companies are also signing contracts with polluters to expand their production, thus increasing their environmental impact. 
A 2023 bibliographic report from Inria and CEA-Leti emphasizes that AI's carbon footprint must be assessed using full life cycle analysis (LCA), including hardware manufacturing, training energy, and deployment phases, rather than only operational emissions.


==== Energy use and efficiency ====

AI chips, (i.e. GPUs) use more energy and emit more heat than traditional CPU chips. AI models with inefficiently implemented architectures, or trained on less efficient chips may use more energy. Since the 1940's the energy efficiency of computation has doubled every 1.6 years. 
The International Energy Agency (IEA) released its 2025 Electricity Analysis and Forecast in February 2025, projecting 4% growth in global electricity demand over the next three years due to data center growth, increased industrial production, increased electrification, and increased use of air conditioning. By 2027, the US's energy consumption is expected to grow by an amount equivalent to California's entire annual power usage, largely driven by energy-hungry data centers and manufacturing operations. In 2024, U.S. electricity generation rose by 3%, with data centers emerging as a dominant force behind the increase. The trend is expected to continue as semiconductor and battery manufacturing plants ramp up operations, further intensifying demand.
In 2024, a US public policy group reported that AI and other technologies and industries poised to dominate the global economy are characterized by their high electricity demands. As such, the foundation of US energy strategy and policymaking will be to prioritize the reliable and abundant provision of electricity to support these critical sectors, which are needed to maintain the US economic and technological leadership in the twenty-first century. The rapid proliferation of AI has created unprecedented demand for electrical power, presenting a major obstacle to the sector's growth. E.g., in Northern Virginia, the largest global hub for AI data centers, the timeline for connecting bigger facilities—those requiring over 100 megawatts of power—to the electrical grid has extended to seven years, highlighting the strain on the energy infrastructure and the challenge of meeting AI's escalating power needs. Across the United States, utilities are experiencing the most substantial surge in electrical demand in decades. This strain is directly contributing to longer wait times for grid connections, complicating efforts to maintain the country's technological leadership in AI. The significance of these energy challenges extends beyond logistics. A New York Times editorial emphasized the critical role of energy infrastructure, stating that "Electricity is more than just a utility; it's the bedrock of the digital era. If the United States truly wants to secure its leadership in A.I., it must equally invest in the energy systems that power it."
Globally, the electricity consumption of data centers rose to 460 terawatts in 2022. This would have made data centers the 11th largest electricity consumer in the world, between the nations of Saudi Arabia (371 terawatts) and France (463 terawatts), according to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.


=== Decisions and strategies by individual companies ===
In 2024, Google failed to reach key goals from their net zero plan as a result of their work with AI, and had a 48% increase in greenhouse gas emission attributable to their growth in AI. 
In September 2024, Microsoft announced an agreement with Constellation Energy to re-open the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant to provide Microsoft with 100% of all electric power produced by the plant for 20 years. Reopening the plant, which suffered a partial nuclear meltdown of its Unit 2 reactor in 1979, will require Constellation to get through strict regulatory processes which will include extensive safety scrutiny from the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission. If approved (this will be the first ever US re-commissioning of a nuclear plant), over 835 megawatts of power – enough for 800,000 homes – of energy will be produced. The cost for re-opening and upgrading is estimated at $1.6 billion (US) and is dependent on tax breaks for nuclear power contained in the 2022 US Inflation Reduction Act. The US government and the state of Michigan are investing almost $2 billion (US) to reopen the Palisades Nuclear Reactor on Lake Michigan. Closed since 2022, the plant is planned to be reopened in October 2025. The Three Mile Island facility will be renamed the Crane Clean Energy Center after Chris Crane, a nuclear proponent and former CEO of Exelon who was responsible for Exelon spinoff of Constellation.
In 2025, Microsoft unveiled plans to invest $80 billion in the development and expansion of data centers designed to support AI technologies. These facilities, critical to the advancement of AI, depend on vast networks of interconnected chip clusters and significant electrical power to operate efficiently.


== Water usage ==

Cooling AI servers can demand large amounts of fresh water which is evaporated in cooling towers.  To minimize the use of water required for cooling, centers are adopting a 
closed-loop system where the water is reused.
Another major AI usage of freshwater is the manufacturing of semiconductor chips. Semiconductor chips act as processors for the large information models and their immense computational demands. Currently, the average semiconductor chip costs roughly 8-10 gallons of water, as a result of production of these chips requiring ultra pure water. This water is processed to remove molecular impurities and ions; it takes between 1.4 and 1.6 gallons of freshwater to make 1 gallon of ultra pure water, which is then used to manufacture the chips. 
In a 2025 paper, researchers projected that AI will withdraw between 4.2 – 6.6 billion cubic meters of water in 2027, greater than half of the total water withdrawal of the United Kingdom. The authors estimated that training GPT-3 may have consumed 700,000 liters of water, and that 10–50 medium-length GPT-3 responses consume about 500 mL of fresh water, "depending on when and where it is deployed". According to other researchers the median Google Gemini text prompt in 2025 consumes about five drops of water (0.26 milliliter).
One data center that Microsoft had considered building near Phoenix, due to increasing AI usage, was likely to consume up to 56 million gallons of fresh water each year, equivalent to the water footprints of 670 families. Microsoft may have increased water consumption by 34% due to AI, while Google increased its water usage by 20% due to AI. Due to their Iowa data center cluster, Microsoft was responsible for 6% of the freshwater use in a local town.
A possible solution for reducing water consumption is to build data centers in colder countries that can offer a natural cooling system. For example, Facebook (now Meta) built a data center in Luleå, northern Sweden, in 2011. In addition, Google invested one more billion euros into the expansion of its data centre campus in Hamina in Finland in 2024, which was primarily created to adapt an old paper mill so that seawater would travel to the data centre's heat exchangers which then expelled the hot water back into the ocean for a full cycle, for a total of 4.5 billion euros invested in the site.


== E-waste ==

Electronic waste (E-waste) due to production of AI hardware may also contribute to emissions. The rapid growth of AI may also lead to faster deprecation of devices, resulting in hazardous e-waste. Among the 62 million tonnes of e-waste produced in 2022, less than one quarter of the total mass was properly recycled. Worldwide, the annual generation of e-waste is rising by 2.6 million tonnes annually, on track to reach 82 million tonnes by 2030, a further 33% increase from the 2022 figure. AI could have an important role because it is expected to add 1.2 million to 5 million metric tons of e-waste in total by 2030, which would represent up to 12% of global e-waste. Some applications of AI, such as for robot recycling, may reduce e-waste.


== Mining ==
Large-scale AI is typically housed in data centres, which can exact heavy tolls on the planet. Their electronics rely on huge amounts of raw materials: making a 2 kg computer requires 800 kg of raw materials. In addition, the microchips that power AI require rare-earth elements, often mined in environmentally destructive ways.


== Social impact and environmental justice ==
Environmental degradation caused by AI can negatively impact certain geographic regions more than others. One-fifth of US data centers, which rely heavily on water for cooling, consume water from drought-stricken areas with moderate to high regional water stress. This increases the likelihood of seasonal water shortages in the public water supply of already-vulnerable regions. Local environmental impacts in the communities where AI models are trained have included local air and water pollution, elevated carbon emissions and ozone, and worsening megadroughts. 
Community activists have expressed concerns about the impact of AI on air quality, water access, and grid stability in marginalized neighborhoods that have historically suffered from industrial pollution. A large data center owned by xAI has faced criticism for environmental racism due to the alleged inequitable pollution in the majority-Black and low-income community of Boxtown. In 2025, the Southern Environmental Law Center (SELC) and the NAACP filed a lawsuit against xAI, alleging that the company is depriving the community of its human rights of clean air and a healthy environment and is in violation of the Clear Air Act. The data center houses 35 methane gas turbines which are not equipped with pollution controls, and according to the SELC operated for months without air pollution permits. Southwest Memphis has a cancer risk at four times the national average due to industrial contamination and air toxics exposure. 


== Climate solutions ==

Despite concerns about its environmental footprint, AI has demonstrated capabilities in improving weather forecasting and climate analysis. Machine learning models can process vast amounts of meteorological data to enhance short-term weather predictions and identify atmospheric patterns that traditional numerical methods may miss. These systems are being applied to model extreme weather events including floods, droughts, and heatwaves, enabling improved disaster preparedness and early warning systems.
AI algorithms are also being used to monitor environmental changes, including tracking deforestation, measuring polar ice melt, and monitoring emissions from various sources.
Beyond generating climate insights, AI technologies are being deployed in emission reduction efforts. Google has developed Project Green Light, which uses AI to optimize traffic light timing to reduce stop-and-go traffic, potentially decreasing vehicle emissions at intersections. Some climate scientists have suggested that AI could improve the efficiency of renewable energy systems, though concerns remain about AI's own substantial energy requirements.
AI is also being applied to genetic engineering. An AI tool called Social LEAP Estimates Animal Poses (SLEAP) is being used to improve the carbon sequestration of plant root systems.  One machine learning project, the Open Catalyst project, has been used to identify "suitable low-cost electrocatalysts" for battery storage of renewable energy sources. AI is also being explored to improve sustainability in environmentally intensive sectors such as food production and fast fashion by optimizing supply chains and reducing waste. However, comprehensive frameworks for evaluating the net climate impact of AI systems, accounting for both their energy costs and potential environmental benefits, have yet to be widely adopted.


== Policy and regulation ==


=== United States ===
The environmental impacts of AI have been a blindspot in the range of AI legislation proposed in the  US Congress. As of November 2024, the Artificial Intelligence Environmental Impacts Act of 2024 introduced in the  Senate by Massachusetts Senator Ed Markey was the only federal bill to make environmental recommendations for the use of AI. The Act would have required the administrators of the Environmental Protection Agency, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, and the Department of Energy to study the environmental effects of AI's development, deployment, and post-deployment and enact a voluntary reporting system for AI-related environmental impacts. The bill has not been reintroduced in the 119th Congress.
In lieu of federal legislation on the subject, certain state governments have introduced policy on the environmental cost of AI. Virginia is considering legislation requiring data centers to submit water use estimates, reflecting growing concerns about resource consumption, sustainability, and land use. For instance, Virginia's Joint Legislative Audit and Review Commission (JLARC) has recommended that data centers report their energy and water usage to address the strain these facilities place on infrastructure and resources. Another Virginia bill proposed a mandatory review and approval process from the State Corporation Commission (SCC) for data center developments exceeding 100 megawatts to ensure grid reliability. However, the House Labor and Commerce Committee unanimously voted against the bill, expressing concerns that it might deter data center investments in the state. Additionally, House Bill 2035, introduced in the Virginia General Assembly, would require data centers to report quarterly on water and energy use to the Department of Environmental Quality, with the information made publicly accessible.


=== European Union ===
The European Union (EU) intends to regulate the environmental impact of artificial intelligence on multiple levels of government. The European Green Deal (EGD), set forth by the European Commission and approved in 2020, states its intention to utilize AI and other information and communication technology (ICT) to advance sustainability goals. Partnerships between the Commission and various European environmental and IT groups culminated in the development of the Green Deal Data Space (GDDS). As part of the European Data Portal, the GDDS project aims to aggregate cross-sectorial data in environmental and climate science to support the policy goals set forth in the EGD. AI agents can use the portal to find trends in the data and make recommendations to policymakers.
Policy research undertaken at the request of the European Commission recommends the EU take a bolder stance against the environmental costs of AI. One ethics report advocates that AI systems "should take into account the environment, including other living beings, and their social and societal impact should be carefully considered." Other reports by EU sources and independent watchdogs point to the  of environmental considerations in AI model prohibitions set forth in the  European Artificial Intelligence Act, and advocate for the assessment of environmental risks posed by the proliferation of AI systems. A 2022 case study recommends the EU restrict market access for AI systems that fail to implement global emissions monitoring or reduction strategies, along with mandated efficiency improvements, industry-wide sustainability reporting, and standardized life-cycle assessments (LCAs).
 EU member states maintain individualized national AI strategies, many of which include sustainability goals.


==== France ====
France devises general environmental priorities in its national AI strategy report. Notably, it advocates that AI and data system development should be sustainably designed from the onset to support "the ecological transition of the European cloud industry." Furthermore, the report advocates for the publication of "ecological data" to promote AI-driven environmental solutions. The report also includes France's intention to support the adoption of AI for a more efficient grid and renewable energy transition.


==== Germany ====
Germany published its national AI strategy in December 2020 which includes dedicated sections on the environmental impacts of AI. These begin with the federal government's intention to thoroughly research and develop AI systems that can be used to promote energy efficiency, conservation, a circular economy, partnerships with higher education, natural resource management, and progress toward  United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). A subsequent section emphasizes the need for a reduction of energy consumption and a standardized environmental impact assessment (EIA) to create a net carbon-negative AI ecosystem.
Germany also operates the "AI Lighthouses" program which issues grants directly to businesses, non-profits, and researchers utilizing AI to develop environmental solutions. As of 2024, the German German Federal Environmental Ministry (BMUv) has disbursed upwards of 70 million euros in funding through the initiative.


==== Italy ====
The Italian national strategy for AI, crafted by a dedicated working group appointed by the  Ministry of Economic Development (MISE), aims to leverage Italy's advantage in AI research and development to regain momentum in achieving its SDGs. The report principally advocates for government-backed stimulus in the development of AI for sustainability.


== See also ==
Workplace impact of artificial intelligence
Environmental impact of bitcoin
Environmental impact of computers


== Notes ==


== References ==