Eyeris is an artificial intelligence software company specializing in automotive in-cabin sensing AI and sensor fusion technologies for autonomous vehicles (AVs) and highly automated vehicles (HAVs). Eyeris was founded in 2013 by Modar Alaoui with its headquarters in Mountain View, California.


== History ==
Eyeris was established in 2013 by Modar Alaoui to develop vision-based AI technologies, initially focusing on facial expression analysis and emotional AI.
In 2016, at Nvidia GTC Eyeris introduced its Driver Monitor System, an AI-powered in-cabin sensing software designed to analyze driver attentiveness and emotional states using a camera-facing system. The technology leverages computer vision, deep learning, and real-time processing to assess facial expressions and cognitive states. In 2017, Toyota Concept-i adopted Eyeris' AI technology after it was introduced at the TU-Automotive Japan event that was held in Tokyo in October 2017.
At the 2019 Consumer Electronics Show (CES), Eyeris showcased a portfolio of deep neural network (DNN) AI models designed for multi-camera in-cabin monitoring. Demonstrated in a Tesla Model S, the system provided real-time in-vehicle scene understanding by assessing the driver's and passengers' facial features, body posture, actions, and activities. For edge inference, Eyeris integrated a partner company's AI chip, built with 10-nanometer technology, capable of performing 10 trillion operations per second (TOPS) within a thermal envelope of 7 watts.
In January 2020, Eyeris integrated Texas Instruments (TI) Jacinto TDA4 SoC processors and 2D RGB-IR image sensors into its in-cabin sensing AI solution. Using TI's D3 Engineering DesignCore platform, this integration enabled efficient inference of Eyeris' deep neural network (DNN) from multiple RGB-IR cameras simultaneously. In June 2021, Eyeris collaborated with STMicroelectronics to extend ST's Global-Shutter sensor technology to in-cabin sensing applications. The partnership leveraged Eyeris' deep neural networks (DNN) to provide a detailed understanding of the vehicle interior, including Occupant Monitoring Systems (OMS), Driver Monitoring Systems (DMS), activity prediction, and child presence detection (CPD).
In September 2022, during the inaugural InCabin conference in Brussels, Eyeris unveiled the world's first in-cabin Monocular 3D Sensing AI. This technology transforms standard 2D cameras into 3D perception systems using depth regression algorithms, enabling comprehensive monitoring of the entire vehicle cabin.
At CES 2024, Marelli announced the integration of Eyeris' in-cabin monocular 3D sensing technology into its context-aware mobility experience (CAMEX) within its Software-Defined Interior. This system included depth-aware DMS and OMS, enabling CAMEX to analyze user behaviors and moods in real-time and adjust vehicle settings.
In January 2024, Eyeris partnered with OmniVision and Leopard Imaging to develop a production reference design that integrated Eyeris' advanced monocular 3D sensing AI software into Leopard Imaging's 5-megapixel backside-illuminated global shutter camera. The design incorporated OmniVision's OX05B image sensor and OAX4600 image signal processor (ISP) to enhance safety and comfort throughout the entire automobile cabin.


== Awards and recognitions ==
In 2015, Eyeris was among the TU Automotive Awards finalists in the Best Commercial Vehicle System Integrator, the Best Safety or ADAS Solution and the Best Industry Newcomer categories. In 2017, Eyeris won the TU Automotive Awards in the Best Connected Service or Product for Commercial Market for driver and occupants monitoring AI category.
In the 2018 TU Automotive Awards Eyeris was among the finalist in the Best Auto Mobility Product or Service and the Best Connected Product or Service categories, and in the Best Auto Mobility Product or Service and the Best Data/A.I. Product or Service categories in 2019, and the winner of the 2019 AutoSens Silver Awards in the Best Automotive Safety System and the Most Innovative In-Cabin Application categories.
In 2020, Eyeris was a finalist in the Best Automotive AI Product of the Year category at the Informa Tech Automotive Awards, recognized for its innovative Mobility Product or Service, and the winner of the Global Automotive Awards in the Best AV In-Cabin Sensor Innovator category.
In 2021, won the Informa Tech Automotive Awards in the Cockpit of the Future Product or Service of the Year category, and was finalist in its Startup of the Year, Automotive Tech Company of the Year, and Cockpit of the Future Product or Service of the Year categories. In 2022, was an AutoSens Award finalist in the Most Novel Research Award category, and finalist in the Informa Tech Automotive Award in the Cockpit of the Future Product or Service of the Year and the Automotive AI Product or Service of the Year categories, and finalist in the Software Supplier of the Year and the Automotive Cockpit of the Future categories in the Informa Tech Automotive Award.
In 2024, Eyeris won Two AutoTech Awards at AutoTech: Detroit, including Automotive Tech Company of the Year and Automotive Tech Product of the Year, for pioneering the world's first in-cabin monocular 3D sensing AI solution.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website