While there is an argument that artificial intelligence (AI)  will improve access to Sikh teachings, philosophy, and history, there are skeptics who believe the information provided may not be accurate. Furthermore, there are concerns regarding AI-generated images of Sikh personalities and their potential to offend members of the Sikh community.


== Potential uses and ethics ==
According to Devinder Pal Singh, A.I. has the potential to improve access to Sikh writings (via translations), help preserve history (such as by digitizing Sikh texts), and increase connections on a global-scale. However, he warns that there is a risk that A.I. can misinterpret Sikh beliefs and practices and that it is controversial for a monetized software to be used vis-a-vis the Sikh religion, which espouses equality, with the risk that less financially well-off people may not be able to afford access to A.I., privacy and data concerns, and there is a risk of decreasing real-life, community bonds, such as at the gurdwara or langar. D. P. Singh has also written that the use of artificial intelligence may not be in agreement with Sikh ethics, as A.I. lacks a sense of spiritual consciousness does not possess a "sacred essence" that is found in humans. Hardev Singh Virk raised concerns about the technology and how it A.I. could not replicate humanity, as it does not possess bibek buddhi (spiritual intelligence) nor surat (consciousness). According to Harsimran Kaur and Daljit Kaur Gill, gurdwaras could integrate artificial intelligence to improve accessibility to the site and teachings and improve security and management. In 2024, Sikh Heritage British Columbia held a talk by Harjinder Singh Sandhu and Jujaar Singh on the impact of A.I. on Sikhs during Sikh Heritage Month.

In 2025, the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee has taken an opposing view over the usage of artificial intelligence for Sikhism, believing that the technology spreads misinformation on the religion, regarding Gurmat (Sikh philosophy), Gurbani (Sikh scripture), Sikh history, and the generation of images depicting Sikh figures. The S.G.P.C. has attempted to contact A.I. companies with their concerns and reached out to the central government regarding their concerns. The A.I. companies that the S.G.P.C. has expressed a concern with are namely ChatGPT, DeepSeek, Grok, Gemini AI, Meta, Google, VEO 3, Descript, Runway ML, Pictory, Magisto, InVideo, DALL·E 2, MidJourney, DeepAI, and others. The S.G.P.C. had earlier lodged a complaint against Dhruv Rathee for their usage of A.I. to generate images of the Sikh gurus. Puneet Sahani has utilized A.I. for his projects regarding the Sikh religion.


== Sikh artificial intelligence software ==
A Sikh-orientated A.I. software, named KhalsaGPT, claims to be the first Sikh artificial intelligence software, and was launched on 6 June 2023. It was developed by Daljit Singh, Ranbir Singh, and Rupinder Singh. Another software, Sikh GPT also claims to be the first A.I. dedicated to Sikhism.


== See also ==
Buddhism and artificial intelligence


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Vaidyamath, Raj C. (12 June 2023). Sikhism Unveiled: An AI Assisted Exploration: Powered By Artificial Intelligence. Amazon Digital Services LLC - Kdp. ISBN 9798398107777.