Suno is a generative artificial intelligence music creation  platform, distributed and operated through the Warner Music Group/WMG music company. It is a digital audio workstation, designed to generate realistic, commercial pop songs, that combine vocals and instrumentation, or are purely instrumental. The platform was initially developed by Suno, Inc., of Cambridge, Massachusetts. Suno has been widely available since December 20, 2023, after the launch of a web application and a partnership with Microsoft, which included Suno as a plugin in Microsoft Copilot.
The program operates by producing songs based on text prompts provided by users. Suno, Inc., has been sued by the Recording Industry Association of America for copyright infringement, and thousands of musicians have signed a letter demanding that the company cease using copyrighted music in their training data. Suno does not disclose the dataset used to train its artificial intelligence but claims it has been safeguarded against plagiarism and copyright concerns.


== History ==
Suno, Inc., was founded by four people: Michael Shulman, Georg Kucsko, Martin Camacho, and Keenan Freyberg. They all worked for Kensho, an AI startup, before starting their own company in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
In April 2023, Suno released their open-source text-to-speech and audio model called "Bark" on GitHub. On March 21, 2024, Suno released its V3 version for all users. The new version allowed users to create a limited number of four-minute songs using a free account. Users can pay for more features. In April 2024, a sentimental ballad was generated with Suno based on the text of the MIT License.
On July 1, 2024, a mobile app for Suno was released.
On November 19, 2024, Suno upgraded its AI song model program to v4.
In January 2025, Michael Shulman remarked on a podcast, "I think the majority of people don't enjoy the majority of the time they spend making music."
In July 2025, Suno user imoliver signed a record deal with Hallwood Media, which became the first instance of a traditional music label signing an AI-based creator. Hallwood later signed with AI-artist Xania Monet for US$3 million. Monet's songs were generated by Suno AI by poet Telisha Jones.
In November 2025, Suno agreed to a $500 million dollar lawsuit settlement, in which Warner Music Group would take ownership and overhead of AI likeness, music, audio, software, copyrights, AI tools and music created by users on Suno.


== Legal issues ==
In June 2024, a lawsuit, led by the Recording Industry Association of America, was filed against Suno and Udio alleging widespread infringement of copyrighted sound recordings. The lawsuit sought to bar the companies from training on copyrighted music, as well as damages of up to $150,000 per work from infringements that have already taken place.
In March 2025, one day after thousands of musicians including Thom Yorke and ABBA's Björn Ulvaeus signed a letter calling for Suno to stop training its model on copyrighted music, Timbaland endorsed SUNO in a video on the company's website.


== See also ==
Udio


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website