VAST Data is a privately held technology company focused on artificial intelligence (AI) and deep learning computing infrastructure. The company provides an operating system for AI designed to help organizations build and scale intelligent applications by unifying compute, data management, and high-performance storage infrastructure.


== History ==
VAST Data was founded in 2016 by Renen Hallak, the former head of R&D at XtremIO (acquired in 2012 by Dell EMC), Shachar Fienblit, formerly of Kaminario, and Jeff Denworth, formerly of CTERA Networks. Mike Wing, formerly of Dell EMC, serves as company president.
In February 2019, VAST emerged from stealth mode, announcing $80 million of funding and the launch of its data storage software built on a new distributed systems architecture called DASE (Disaggregated and Shared Everything).
VAST ranked No. 5 on the 2022 Deloitte Technology Fast 500 and No. 3 on the 2023 Financial Times list of The Americas’ Fastest-Growing Companies.
In December 2023, VAST announced it had surpassed $1 billion in cumulative software bookings and $200 million in annual recurring revenue (ARR).
In 2024, VAST was included in the Forbes Cloud 100 and was named a leader in the Gartner Magic Quadrant for File and Object Storage Platforms.
In 2025, VAST was named to the CNBC Disruptor 50 and the Forbes AI 50.
In May 2025 the company announced it had reached $2 billion in cumulative software bookings.


== Funding ==
VAST Data has raised $381 million in funding.
In December 2023 VAST announced a Series E funding round led by Fidelity Management and Research Co. that raised $118 million at a valuation of $9.1 billion.


== Product ==
The VAST AI Operating System is designed to capture large-scale data from the natural world, enrich it with real-time AI-driven context, and support autonomous, agent-based workflows. It comprises several components:

VAST DataStore (formerly known as Universal Storage), an unstructured data storage solution
VAST DataBase, a database management system (DBMS) that includes the constructs of a traditional database, data warehouse, and data lake
VAST DataEngine, a global function execution engine
VAST DataSpace, a global namespace that permits every location to store, retrieve, and process data
VAST InsightEngine with NVIDIA, a real-time retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) solution
VAST AgentEngine, an AI agent deployment and orchestration system
VAST SyncEngine, a tool that manages the ingestion, cataloging, and access of unstructured data from distributed sources for use in AI application
The platform is deployable in on-premises data centers, public clouds, and edge environments, and is delivered as a subscription-based service.


== Operations ==
VAST operates globally in markets such as Japan, Singapore, the United Arab Emirates, and Saudi Arabia. VAST is a no-headquarters company with offices in New York City; Campbell, California; Durham, North Carolina; Tel-Aviv; Tokyo, Riyadh; Singapore; and Dubai.
VAST partners with several systems technology vendors, including Arista, Cisco, Equinix, HPE, Lenovo, NVIDIA, and Supermicro.


== References ==


== External links ==
VAST Data