Chulalongkorn University (CU; Thai: จฬ.; Thai: จุฬาลงกรณ์มหาวิทยาลัย, RTGS: Chulalongkon Mahawitthayalai) is a public autonomous research university in Bangkok, Thailand. The university was originally founded during King Chulalongkorn's reign as a school for training royal pages and civil servants in 1899 (B.E. 2442) at the Grand Palace. It was later established as a national university in 1917, making it the oldest institute of higher education in Thailand.
During the reign of Chulalongkorn's son, King Vajiravudh, the Royal Pages School became the Civil Service College of King Chulalongkorn. The Rockefeller Foundation was instrumental in helping the college form its academic foundation. On 26 March 1917, King Vajiravudh renamed the college "Chulalongkorn University".
Chulalongkorn University is one of the National Research Universities and supported by the Office of Nation Education Standards and Quality Assessment of Thailand. Moreover, CU is the only Thai university which is a member of Association of Pacific Rim Universities (APRU).

CU is composed of nineteen faculties, a School of Agriculture, three colleges, ten institutes and two other schools. Its campus occupies a vast area in downtown Bangkok. Graduates customarily receive their diplomas from the King of Thailand, a tradition begun by King Prajadhipok.


== History ==

King Chulalongkorn's reforms, aimed at transforming Thailand into a modern state, demanded trained officials specialized in various fields. In 1899, the King founded the "Civil Service Training School" near the north gate of the Grand Palace. Those who graduated from the school would become royal pages. As royal pages, they learned how to manage organizations by working closely with the king, which was a traditional way to enter the Siamese bureaucracy. After serving as royal pages, they would then serve in the Ministry of Interior or other government ministries.
On 1 April 1902, the King renamed the school. It became the "Royal Pages School" (Thai: โรงเรียนมหาดเล็ก). On 1 January 1911, King Vajiravudh changed the name to "Civil Service College of King Chulalongkorn" (Thai: โรงเรียนข้าราชการพลเรือนของพระบาทสมเด็จพระจุลจอมเกล้าเจ้าอยู่หัว) as a memorial to his father and moved the school to Windsor Palace in the Pathumwan District.
The King subsidized the construction of a university campus and organized various schools around the city into Chulalongkorn. The college offered eight majors taught by five schools including;

School of International Relations in the Royal Palace
School of Teacher Training at Baan Somdet Chao Phraya
Royal Medical College at Siriraj Hospital
School of Legal Studies
School of Mechanical Sciences at Windsor Palace

King Rama VI realized that education should be provided not only to bureaucrats, but to all people. On 26 March 1917, the college was upgraded to "Chulalongkorn University" (Thai: จุฬาลงกรณ์มหาวิทยาลัย), and the schools were transformed into four faculties: Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Faculty of Public Administration, Faculty of Engineering, and Faculty of Medicine.
The Rockefeller Foundation reorganized the curriculum of the Faculty of Medicine. In 1923, the Faculty of Medicine became the first faculty to accept secondary school (Mattayom) graduates. The remaining faculties then followed suit. After the 1932 Revolution, the People's Party wanted legal and political studies to be independent of "royalists" so they moved the Faculty of Law and Political Science to the new Thammasat University in 1933.
In 1938, Chulalongkorn University's Preparatory School was founded to provide pre-collegiate education to students. Those who managed to enter the university had to spend two years in the Preparatory School before going on to the Faculty of Arts and Sciences. The Preparatory School, however, ceased to be a university-owned preparatory school in 1947 and became the independent Triam Udom Suksa School. Later, the university established Chulalongkorn University Demonstration School (CUD) as a laboratory school for primary and secondary education for the Faculty of Education.


== Symbols ==


=== Phra Kiao ===

Since the establishment of the Royal Pages School, the former name of the university, King Chulalongkorn authorized the use of his personal emblem as a school emblem. The emblem is called Phra Kiao, a Thai coronet, royal headgear for young princes and princesses. As the school was transformed into the university, the King authorized the use of phra kiao. Today, phra kiao appears not only in formal letters and transcripts, but also on souvenirs made by the university as well as student uniforms.


=== Student uniform ===
Undergraduates are required to wear a uniform when studying, taking examinations, or contacting the university in person. Male graduate students wear a collared or polo shirt and dark trousers. Women wear a plain blouse with long skirt.
Originally, the university uniform was adapted from a uniform worn by Chulalongkorn's heirs. The uniform was later updated, but the original is reserved as a formal uniform. The formal uniform is usually worn by student leaders and graduates.
Today, the ordinary uniform for male undergraduate students consists of a plain white shirt with long or short sleeves and black (or dark blue) trousers. Wearing a dark blue necktie with colored phra kiao engraved on its front is mandatory for first-year students but optional for higher years. However, a black tie with a silver phra kiao pin is usually used by upperclass student in some faculties. Female students are required to wear a short-sleeved blouse with a fold along the spine. The buttons must be made of metal, and a small phra kiao emblem must be pinned on the right breast. A dark blue or black pleated skirt with any black, white, or brown shoes are worn. For female first-year students, white leather shoes are mandatory. Chulalongkorn University's uniforms have long been the template of many uniforms used in other universities in Thailand.


=== Academic dress ===

The academic dress of Chulalongkorn University is based on ceremonial attire called khrui, a gown made from very fine mesh. The robe was originally reserved for pre-ordination monks, ministers and royal family members. Like dresses worn in the United Kingdom, the robe is open-fronted and calf-length. Cap and hood, however, are omitted. The gown is faced and lined with a felt strip dyed according to the status of the wearer and decorated with gold ribbons. The elbow and wrist portion of the gown is also wrapped with the same felt strip.
Bachelor's and master's gown is faced and bordered with a black felt strip, while a doctor's gown uses a scarlet felt strip. This colour scheme is similar to one used at the University of Oxford: Black for bachelors and masters (and doctors in undress); Scarlet for doctors (in full-dress). The cord (bachelor) or ribbon (master and doctor) dyed with the faculty colour is attached to the centre of the felt strip longitudinally.  Officers' (lecturers, university council members, vice-chancellor and chancellor) gown is faced with a pink strip and centred with a gold thread, regardless of the faculty. The specially designed gown with a yellow facing is reserved for the king of Thailand, who is also Visitor to the University.
Vajiravudh authorized the university to use the traditional Thai gown instead of the western one, but the regulation on this matter was enacted in 1930 by Prajadhipok.


==== Example of felt strips ====


=== Rain Trees ===

Rain trees are common on the university campus. They are associated with the cycle of student life. Fresh green leaves at beginning of the term represent the freshmen's naivete. As the tree produces slimy pods and sheds leaves, the ground beneath it becomes slippery, thus alerting students to prepare for examinations. If they walk carefully, they will not slip (pass examinations). If they walk heedlessly, they will slip and fall (fail examinations).
From 1937 to 1957, many rain trees were cut down to free space for new buildings. King Bhumibol Adulyadej noticed the dramatic decrease in the number of rain trees. On 15 January 1962, he brought five trees from Hua Hin and planted them in front of the university auditorium, proclaiming: "...I give these five trees as an eternal memorial." (Thai: จึงขอฝากต้นไม้ไว้ห้าต้นให้เป็นเครื่องเตือนใจตลอดกาล).


== Organization ==

 

Chulalongkorn University consists of 19 faculties, three colleges, one school and many institutes which function as teaching and research units.
In 1917, the university had four faculties: Arts and Sciences, Public Administration, Engineering, and Medicine. The Faculty of Law was established in 1933 as part of the Faculty of Law and Political Science. From the 1930s to the 1950s it expanded to various fields including Pharmacy (1934), Veterinary Science (1935), Architecture (1939), Dentistry (1940), and Commerce and Accountancy (1943). In 1943, the regency government under General Phibun separated the Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry, Pharmacy, and Veterinary Science to become the University of Medical Sciences, now Mahidol University. In 1948, the Faculty of Political Science was re-established. The Faculty of Education was established in 1957 from the School of Teacher Training at Baan Somdet Chao Phraya (Thai: โรงเรียนฝึกหัดครู บ้านสมเด็จเจ้าพระยา). In 1967, the Faculty of Veterinary Science was returned from Kasetsart University and the Faculty of Medicine at Chulalongkorn Hospital was moved from University of Medical Sciences to Chulalongkorn University. In 1972, the Faculty of Dentistry and Faculty of Pharmacy were reinstated.
The Office of the Commission on Agricultural Resource Education (OCARE) was established in 2009. It is not an administrative office, but a school in which teaching and research are carried out. It admits students from two groups: one from northern Thai provinces (Nan, Phayao, Phrae, Uttaradit) and another from the rest of country. It was upgraded to the School of Agricultural Resources with full degree-granting power on 5 March 2014. In 2014 it became the School of Agriculture, Chulalongkorn University (SAR).
In 2019, aiming to address global industry changes and demand for relevant education, Chulalongkorn University launched Chulalongkorn School of Integrated Innovation (ScII) to offer the first in Asia interdisciplinary undergraduate degree in both arts and science – Bachelor of Arts and Science in Integrated Innovation (BAScii).


=== Health sciences ===
Faculty of Allied Health Sciences
Faculty of Dentistry
Faculty of Medicine
Faculty of Nursing
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Faculty of Psychology
Faculty of Sport Sciences
Faculty of Veterinary Science


=== Science and technology ===
Faculty of Architecture
Faculty of Engineering
Faculty of Science
School of Agricultural Resources


=== Social science and humanities ===
Faculty of Commerce and Accountancy (Also known as Chulalongkorn Business School)
Faculty of Arts (Letters)
Faculty of Communication Arts
Faculty of Economics
Faculty of Education
Faculty of Fine and Applied Arts (Art)
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Political Science


=== Integrated Faculty ===
School of Integrated Innovation


=== International programs ===

CU's international programs offers 99 international programs, including 17 Bachelor, 48 Master and 34 Doctoral programs. Admissions for international students are based on the guidelines issued by the Council of University Presidents of Thailand.
Bachelor's Degrees:

Chula International School of Engineering
Faculty of Science
Faculty of Architecture – International Program of Design and Architecture -INDA- and CommDe
School of Integrated Innovation – Bachelor of Arts and Science in Integrated Innovation (BAScii)
Chulalongkorn Business School – The Bachelor of Business Administration
Faculty of Architecture
Faculty of Communication Arts
Faculty of Economics
Faculty of Arts
Faculty of Political Science
Faculty of Psychology
Faculty of Law


=== Graduate institutes ===
College of Population Studies
College of Public Health Science
Graduate School
Language Institute
Petroleum and Petrochemical College
Sasin School of Management


=== Research institutes ===
Aquatic Resources Research Institute
Energy Research Institute
Environmental Research Institute
Institute of Asian Studies
Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering
Metallurgy and Materials Science Research Institute
Social Research Institute
Transportation Institute


=== Associated institutes ===
Police Nursing College
Red Cross College of Nursing


== Research ==
Chulalongkorn University has research organizations in many fields of study. 


== Rankings ==


=== Overall ===
In the QS Asia University Rankings 2016. Chulalongkorn has been ranked as the top Thai university and 45th in Asia
In the QS World University Rankings 2017/18. Chulalongkorn is ranked the 1st in Thailand and 245th in the world
In the QS graduate employability rankings 2016. Chulalongkorn is No. 1 university in Thailand and No. 151 – 200 in the world
In the Center for World University Ranking or CWUR, Chulalongkorn is ranked as number 1 university in Thailand and 308th in world rankings in 2017, considered by alumni, researches, quality of curriculums and instructors.
In the Round University Ranking 2017. Chulalongkorn is ranked the 1st in Thailand and ranked 398th in the world.
In the RUR Research Performance World University Rankings 2016. Chulalongkorn is No. 1 university in Thailand and No. 424 in the world
In the CWTS Leiden Ranking 2016. Chulalongkorn is ranked the first in Thailand and 432nd in the world.
In the THE World University Rankings 2016. Chulalongkorn is ranked 601–800 in the world.
In the RUR Reputation Rankings 2016. Chulalongkorn is No. 1 university in Thailand and No. 182 in the world.
In the SCImago institutions Ranking, which ranks international researches of universities. Chulalongkorn is ranked 475th in World rankings in 2016, up six places from last year.
In the Academic Ranking of World Universities 2017. Chulalongkorn is No. 1 university in Thailand and No. 401–500 in the world.
In the Nature Index, the affiliations of high-quality scientific articles. Chulalongkorn is ranked the 1st in Thailand in 2016.
US News ranked Chulalongkorn 522th in the world. based on the university's reputation, medium, citations, international cooperation, and he quantity of PhD students.
In the 2018 Times Higher Education Emerging Economies Index, Chula ranked 126.
In the UI Green Metric-City Center, Chulalongkorn was ranked the 1st in national rankings and the 15th in world rankings. considered by Setting and Infrastructure, Energy and Climate Change, Waste, Water, Transportation and Education.
The Webometric ranking indicates quantity and quality of the university's medium, considered by being searched by search engines, online documents, and citations in Google Scholar.  Chulalongkorn is ranked the 1st in national rankings 548th in the world.


=== Subject ===
QS World University Rankings by Subject 2024: Chula ranked number one in Thailand in 32 disciplines


== Campus ==

The university campus occupies an area of 637 rai (101.9 ha; 252 acres) in the downtown Pathum Wan District. It accounts for just over half of the 1,153 rai (184.5 ha; 456 acres) of land owned by the university, the rest of which is commercially developed by the university's Property Management Office or used by other institutions.


=== Centenary Park ===

The west side of Chula's campus is the site of this innovative park. It has gradually sloping portions. Its 28 rai expanse contains a water retention pond with a capacity of 3.8 million liters and a rain garden. Both help to ameliorate Bangkok's seasonal flooding. It was built to commemorate Chula's 100th anniversary in 2017.


=== Accommodation ===
Chulalongkorn University International House (CU iHouse) is a 26-storey, 846-unit, on campus residence for international students and lecturers. Rooms come fully furnished with air conditioning, modern conveniences, 24-hour security and safety systems. The residence is included in the university's shuttle bus services.


== Honorary degrees ==
The university has bestowed honorary degrees on heads of state and other international dignitaries, including two U.S. presidents:

Lyndon B. Johnson, October 29, 1966
Bill Clinton, November 26, 1996
Nelson Mandela, July 17, 1997


== Traditions ==
Chulalongkorn University student traditions include:

Chula–Thammasat Traditional Football Match: The annual football match between Chulalongkorn University and Thammasat University in January at Suphashalasai Stadium. It first started in 1934.
Loy Krathong: an annual celebration of the full moon night, which usually falls on the first full moon day in November. Since the festival is open to the public, it attracts many people, especially Chulalongkorn students and faculty and those who live in downtown Bangkok, to come to the university to float their krathongs on the university's pond.
Chulalongkorn Academic Exhibition: a triennial academic and research exhibition presented by Chulalongkorn University's students and faculty. It is regarded as one of the most important academic fairs in Thailand.


== Student activities and clubs ==
The university is host to 40 student clubs, including the Buddhism and Traditions Club, the Religious Studies Club, the Mind Study Club, and the Thai Classical Music Club. Chulalongkorn also has a Morals Network, which actively campaigns to protect student activities from damaging the university's reputation. The university's student government annually organizes the Chula-Thammasat traditional football match jointly with the Chulalongkorn University Alumni Association.
The Student Union of Chulalongkorn University is the primary student organization. It is made up of the Student Government and the Student Council. The Student Government acts as the executive branch of the Student Union, while the Student Council acts as the legislative branch of the Student Union. The Student Union was created by the enactment of the Chulalongkorn University Rules Regarding the Student Union of Chulalongkorn University B.E. 2529 by the Chulalongkorn University Council in their 444th meeting.
The Student Government is managed by an assembly of 30 students. Direct elections by all students fill 10 of these positions, including that of the President of the Student Government. The remaining 20 positions are occupied by the heads of the student unions from each faculty. The Student Government acts as the executive branch of the Student Union.
The Student Council comprises 60 full members, with three representatives elected from each faculty. The President of the Student Council is then chosen indirectly by these elected council members. In addition, 20 associate members are elected from first-year students in each faculty to join the Council after the start of an academic year. These associate members cannot vote in the plenary sitting of the council. The Student Council acts as the legislative branch of the Student Union.
There is no student organization acting as the judicial branch in the Student Union of Chulalongkorn University.
The university requires students to wear school uniforms. In 2022 the Political Science Student Union made a Facebook change arguing for changes in dress practices.


== Notable alumni ==

Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn, Princess of Thailand
Princess Sirivannavari Nariratana Rajakanya, Princess of Thailand
Thawan Thamrongnawasawat, 8th Prime Minister of Thailand
Paetongtarn Shinawatra, 31th Prime Minister of Thailand
Wan Muhamad Noor Matha, Thai politician, Speaker of the House of Representatives and President of the National Assembly of Thailand
Padipat Suntiphada, the First Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives of Thailand
Pornpetch Wichitcholchai, President of the Senate of Thailand
Surakiart Sathirathai, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Thailand's candidate for United Nations Secretary-General
Kittiratt Na-Ranong, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Finance
Parnpree Bahiddha-nukara, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign Affairs
Niwatthamrong Boonsongpaisan, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Commerce
Phumtham Wechayachai, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Commerce
Mingkwan Saengsuwan, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Commerce
Kosit Panpiemras, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Industry
Yongyuth Wichaidit, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Interior
Sudarat Keyuraphan, Thai politician, Minister of Public Health
Chaikasem Nitisiri, Thai politician, Minister of Justice
Kalaya Sophonpanich, Thai politician and physicist, Minister of Science and Technology
Anek Laothamatas, Thai political scientist, Minister of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation
Jakrapob Penkair, Minister to the Office of the Prime Minister
Tiang Sirikhanth, Minister, leader of The Free Thai Movement
Chaithawat Tulathon, Thai politician, Leader of the Opposition, Leader of the Move Forward Party
Natthaphong Ruengpanyawut, Thai politician, Leader of the Opposition, Leader of the People's Party
Chadchart Sittipunt, Thai politician, Governor of Bangkok
Bhichit Rattakul, Thai politician, former Governor of Bangkok
Thanathorn Juangroongruangkit, Thai politician, businessman, Leader of the Future Forward Party
Chit Phumisak, Thai Marxist historian, activist, author, philologist, poet, songwriter, and communist revolutionary
Boonsanong Punyodyana, Thai politician, general secretary of the Socialist Party of Thailand
Boonlua Debyasuvarn, Thai writer, educator and civil servant
Kitti Thonglongya, Thai ornithologist and mammalogist
Prince Subhadradis Diskul, Thai archaeologist, historian
Nidhi Eoseewong, Thai historian, Fukuoka Asian Culture Prize
Therdchai Jivacate, Thai orthopedic surgeon and inventor, Ramon Magsaysay Award
Nilawan Pintong, Thai feminist, Ramon Magsaysay Award
Panipak Wongpattanakit, Thai taekwondo athlete, Gold medal Women's taekwondo at the 2020 Summer Olympics, 2024 Summer Olympics
Tawin Hanprab, Silver medal Men's taekwondo at the 2016 Summer Olympics
Chanatip Sonkham, Bronze medal Men's taekwondo at the 2012 Summer Olympics
Sapsiree Taerattanachai, Thai badminton player, Gold medal 2021 World Championships
Dhasanawalaya Sornsongkram, daughter of Princess Galyani Vadhana
Pinyo Suwankiri, Thailand National Artist (Thai architecture)
Anchalee Vivatanachai, Thai writer, winner of the S.E.A. Write Award
Chiranan Pitpreecha, Thai writer, winner of the S.E.A. Write Award
Binlah Sonkalagiri, Thai writer, winner of the S.E.A. Write Award
Win Lyovarin, Thai writer, winner of the S.E.A. Write Award
Yong Poovorawan, Thai scientist, professor of pediatrics
Pornanong Aramwit, Pharmaceutical scientist, pharmacist and academic
Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Thai banker, former governor of Bank of Thailand.
Phanya Nirunkul, Thai Businessman and TV presenter
Banjong Pisanthanakun, Thai filmmaker and screenwriter
Nawapol Thamrongrattanarit, Thai writer, screenwriter and film director
Artiwara Kongmalai, Thai rock music singer and vocalist
Violette Wautier, Thai singer, songwriter and actress
Alexander Rendell, Thai actor and model
Chaiyapol Julien Poupart, Thai actor and model
Chutavuth Pattarakampol, Thai actor and model
Pakorn Chatborirak, Thai actor and model
Tawan Vihokratana, Thai actor and model
Thitipoom Techaapaikhun, Thai actor
Natapohn Tameeruks, Thai actor and model
Urassaya Sperbund, Thai actress and model
Taksaorn Paksukcharern, Thai actress and model
Pimprapa Tangprabhaporn, Thai actress and model
Sutatta Udomsilp, Thai actress
Pachara Chirathivat, Thai actor and TV presenter
Suppasit Jongcheveevat, Thai actor and model
Waruntorn Paonil, Thai actress and singer
Tontawan Tantivejakul, Thai actress and model
Phuwin Tangsakyuen, Thai actor and singer


== International reputation ==
The PH21 team, Computer Engineering students at Chulalongkorn University, got the 1st prize from the Microsoft Imagine Cup 2016 in the games category
Chulalongkorn University Concert Choir Won Gold Award in World-Class Musical Competition 2014


=== Robocup competitions ===
The university RoboCup team, Plasma‐Z, got several prizes from the robotics competition as follow.

In 2005, almost reached the quarter-final at Osaka RoboCup.
In 2006, the third place and technical challenge at Bremen RoboCup.
In 2007, second place Atlanta World RoboCup.
In 2008, finally, the team got champion of World RoboCup Small‐Sized Robot League at Suzhou, China.
Moreover, another university Robocup team, Plasma-RX has participated in Rescue robot league at World RoboCup 2008, Suzhou, China, and won the first prize and the best-in-class in mobility award.


== See also ==
Academic dress of Chulalongkorn University
Sasin Graduate Institute of Business Administration of Chulalongkorn University
Education in Thailand
Chula United football club
Education for Liberation of Siam


== References ==


== External links ==

Chulalongkorn University official website
Graduate School, Chulalongkorn University
Sasin Graduate Institute of Business Administration of Chulalongkorn University
School of Integrated Innovation
CU-TEP
Panoramic view of Chulalongkorn