Conference USA (CUSA) is a collegiate athletic conference of member institutions in the Southern and Western United States. The conference participates in the NCAA's Division I in all sports, with football competing in the top-level Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS). CUSA's offices are located in Dallas, Texas.


== Member schools ==


=== Current full members ===
  Member departing for the Mountain West Conference in 2026.
  Member departing for the Sun Belt Conference by 2027.

Notes


=== Membership map ===


=== Affiliate members ===
In this table, all dates reflect the calendar year of entry into Conference USA, which for spring sports is the year before the start of competition.
  Members departing for the Pac-12 Conference in 2026.

Notes


=== Former full members ===

Notes


=== Former affiliate members ===
In this table, all dates reflect each school's actual entry into and departure from Conference USA. In the case of the two former affiliates that became full CUSA members, the "left" date reflects their elevation to full membership.
For spring sports, the joining date is the calendar year before the start of competition. For fall sports, the departure date is the calendar year after the last season of competition.

Notes


=== Membership timeline ===

Full members (all-sports) Full members (non-football) Affiliate members (football-only) Affiliate member (other sport) Other conference 1 Other conference 2


== History ==
CUSA (abbreviated "C-USA" before 2023) was founded in 1995 by the merger of the Metro Conference and Great Midwest Conference, two Division I conferences that did not sponsor football. However, the merger did not include either Great Midwest member Dayton or Metro members VCU and Virginia Tech. Since this left an uneven number of schools in the conference, Houston of the dissolving Southwest Conference was extended an invitation and agreed to join following the SWC's disbanding at the end of the 1995–96 academic year. The conference immediately started competition in all sports, except football which started in 1996.
Being the result of a merger, CUSA was originally a sprawling, large league that stretched from Florida to Missouri, Wisconsin to Texas. Many of its original schools were located in major urban centers and had strong basketball traditions, which helped establish the league on a national basis.


=== 2005–06 realignment ===
The conference saw radical changes for the 2005–06 academic year. The Big East Conference had lost several members, and looked to Conference USA to attract replacements. Five CUSA members departed for the Big East, including three football-playing schools (Cincinnati, Louisville, and South Florida) and two non-football schools (DePaul and Marquette; both joined the New Big East in 2013). Another two schools (Charlotte and Saint Louis) left for the Atlantic 10; TCU joined the Mountain West (and is now in the Big 12 with several other former Southwest Conference members); and a ninth member, Army, which was C-USA football-only, opted to become an independent in that sport again.
With the loss of these members, CUSA lured six schools from other conferences: UCF and Marshall from the MAC, as well as Rice, SMU, Tulsa, and later UTEP from the WAC. UCF played in the MAC for football only; for all other sports, it was a member of the Atlantic Sun Conference (ASUN).
With CUSA's membership now consisting of 12 schools, all of which sponsor football, the conference adopted a two-division alignment.


=== 2013–14 realignment ===
In 2013, CUSA entered its next phase with the departure of four schools (Houston, Memphis, SMU, and UCF) for the American Athletic Conference, the football-sponsoring portion of the former Big East Conference. This was again the result of Big East schools leaving for the ACC, this time being Syracuse and Pittsburgh, as well as Notre Dame for non-football sports.
However, when the conferences discussed their plans with the NCAA, they were told that if they merged, the new league would receive only one automatic bid to NCAA championships; at least one of the former conferences would lose expected future revenues from the NCAA men's basketball tournament; and at least one former conference would lose exit fees from any schools that departed for the new league. As a result, both CUSA and the MW backed away from a full merger. As of April 2012, the likeliest scenario was an all-sports alliance in which both conferences retained separate identities. However, after the MW added more members, the alliance was apparently abandoned.
For men's soccer, there was a chance that the MW, SEC, and CUSA along with the one Sun Belt member (FIU), that sponsor the sport, would play under the CUSA's men's soccer program. The MW, which does not sponsor men's soccer, would take three of the four members that offer the sport (UNLV, Air Force, New Mexico—San Diego State is a Pac-12 associate member in that sport), join CUSA's three full members that offer the sport (UAB, Marshall, Tulsa), the two SEC members already in CUSA for the sport (Kentucky, South Carolina), and the Sun Belt's FIU. However, the only MW member school that ultimately moved to CUSA men's soccer was New Mexico.
For the 2013–14 season CUSA invited five new members to join their conference, with all accepting. UTSA and Louisiana Tech joined from the WAC and North Texas and FIU, (an affiliate member of CUSA joining for men's soccer in 2005), from the Sun Belt Conference. Old Dominion, which already housed five of its sports in CUSA, moved the rest of its athletic program from the CAA (except for field hockey, women's lacrosse and wrestling, with the three sports joining the new Big East, the Atlantic Sun, and the MAC respectively because CUSA does not sponsor those sports) and upgraded its football program from the Football Championship Subdivision. Charter member Charlotte returned from the A-10 and accelerated its recently established football program, which was set to begin play in 2013 as an FCS school, to FBS in 2015 with full conference rights in 2016.


=== 2014–15 realignment ===

On November 27, 2012, it was announced that Tulane would leave the conference, effective in the 2014 season, to join the Big East in all sports, and East Carolina would join the Big East for football only (ECU's membership was upgraded to all-sports in March 2013 after the Big East's non-football members, except ACC-bound Notre Dame, announced they were leaving to form a new conference which took the Big East name, leaving the football-playing members to become the American Athletic Conference). Conference USA responded by adding Middle Tennessee and Florida Atlantic, both from the Sun Belt.
On April 1, 2013, Conference USA announced it was adding Western Kentucky, also from the Sun Belt, to offset Tulsa's departure to The American in all sports which was confirmed the next day.


=== 2014–2021 ===
The board of trustees in the University of Alabama system (of which UAB is a member) voted to shut down that football program on December 2, 2014, in a highly controversial move that many have attributed to a pro-Tuscaloosa bias (including trustees such as Paul Bryant Jr., son and namesake of Alabama football coaching legend Bear Bryant). According to Conference USA bylaws, member schools must sponsor football. In January 2015, UAB announced an independent re-evaluation of the program and the finances involved, leaving open a possible resumption of the program as early as the 2016 season. On January 29, 2015, the conference announced that there was no time pressure in making a decision regarding UAB's future membership. The conference also stated that it would wait for the new study results before any further discussions on the subject. On June 1, UAB announced that it would reinstate football effective with the 2016 season, presumably keeping the school in CUSA for the immediate future. The return of football was later pushed back to 2017 with their first game in September. The Blazers won the 2018 conference championship their second year back and won the CUSA title again in 2020.
Commissioner Britton Banowsky stepped down on September 15, 2015, to become the head of the College Football Playoff Foundation. Executive associate commissioner and chief operating officer Judy MacLeod was subsequently named interim commissioner. On October 26 MacLeod was named the conference's third official commissioner, also becoming the first woman to head an FBS conference.
Marshall University's men's soccer program captured the league's first team national championship with its 1–0 overtime win over Indiana in the 2020 College Cup, held in May 2021 due to COVID-19 issues, in Cary, North Carolina.


=== 2020s realignment ===

On October 18, 2021, Yahoo Sports reported that the American Athletic Conference, which had been rocked by the impending departure of three of its most prominent schools (Cincinnati, Houston, UCF) for the Big 12 Conference, was preparing to receive applications from six CUSA members: Charlotte, Florida Atlantic, North Texas, Rice, UAB, and UTSA. ESPN reported the next day that The American had received all six schools' applications, and The American announced all six as future members on October 21, though it did not announce the effective date. The entry date would eventually be confirmed as July 1, 2023.
The day after The American announced its expansion, The Action Network reported that Southern Miss had accepted an invitation to join the Sun Belt Conference in 2023, a move which was formally announced by the university on October 26. The report added that the Sun Belt was preparing to add two other CUSA members in Marshall and Old Dominion, as well as FCS program James Madison. Old Dominion officially announced its move to the Sun Belt Conference on October 27, followed later in the week by Marshall. On March 29, 2022, CUSA agreed to allow Marshall, Old Dominion, and Southern Miss to move to the Sun Belt beginning July 1, 2022, a year earlier than initially announced.
In response to these losses, on November 5, Conference USA announced the addition of four new members to start the 2023 athletic season. These included two ASUN schools, Liberty and Jacksonville State, along with two from the WAC, New Mexico State and Sam Houston. Liberty and New Mexico State previously played football as FBS independents, while Jacksonville State and Sam Houston played at the FCS level in their respective conferences.
On October 7, 2022, Pete Thamel of ESPN reported that current football-sponsoring ASUN member Kennesaw State was in talks to become the tenth member of Conference USA for the 2024 season. One week later, CUSA officially announced Kennesaw State's 2024 entry.
This was followed by the Sun Belt Conference adding beach volleyball for the 2023 season (2022–23 school year), taking with it the three full SBC members that had previously housed that sport in CUSA: Coastal Carolina, Georgia State, and Louisiana–Monroe. Southern Miss also left CUSA beach volleyball as part of its full-time move to the SBC. CUSA would add three new beach volleyball members for that season; Jacksonville State joined CUSA for beach volleyball in advance of full membership that July, Tulane became an associate member, and full member UTEP added a new beach volleyball program. Tarleton announced on April 24, 2023, that it would join CUSA as an associate member for the school's first season of varsity beach volleyball in 2024; CUSA confirmed this on May 11, adding that Missouri State and TCU would also join in beach volleyball for the 2024 season, and that Florida Atlantic and UAB would remain in CUSA beach volleyball after otherwise departing for The American.
On May 10, 2023, CUSA announced that it would add bowling, a women-only sport in the NCAA, effective in 2023–24. The Southland Bowling League, a single-sport conference established by the Southland Conference, was merged into CUSA. The bowling league added Wichita State when it elevated its club team to varsity status in 2024–25.
The conference unveiled a "brand refresh" on July 1, 2023, the same day that Jacksonville State, Liberty, New Mexico State, and Sam Houston joined. The former abbreviation of "C-USA" was retired in favor of "CUSA", and the logo was slightly updated.
On November 27, 2023, Pete Thamel reported on X that Conference USA was expected to add Delaware as a new member for the 2025–26 season. On Tuesday, November 28, 2023, both CUSA and Delaware announced on their websites and social the official move to make Delaware the eleventh all-sports member of the conference. Six months later, on May 10, 2024, both CUSA and Missouri State University jointly announced on their respective websites that Missouri State would also join the league for the 2025–26 season, bringing league membership up to 12. The 12-member lineup will last only one year, as UTEP, the longest-tenured current member, will leave for the Mountain West Conference in 2026.
On November 5, 2024, the conference announced that former full member South Florida would join as an affiliate member in beach volleyball in 2025. Bowling affiliate Stephen F. Austin announced on May 22, 2025 that it had dropped the sport effective immediately.


== Hall of Fame ==
In 2019, Conference USA inducted its first Hall of Fame class, comprising 20 student-athletes, three coaches, and two administrators. The inductees included former University of Cincinnati basketball player Kenyon Martin, baseball player Kevin Youkilis, and men's basketball head coach Bob Huggins.


== Commissioners ==
Michael Slive 1995–2002
Britton Banowsky 2002–2015
Judy MacLeod 2015–present


== Sports ==


=== Sports sponsored ===
Conference USA sponsors championship competition in eight men's and 11 women's NCAA sanctioned sports. Eleven schools are affiliate members—one in baseball, four in beach volleyball, five in bowling, and one in both beach volleyball and bowling. The most recent changes in sports sponsorship were the dropping of men's soccer and women's swimming and diving after the 2021–22 season, plus the addition of bowling in 2023–24.


=== Men's sponsored sports by school ===


==== Men's varsity sports not sponsored by Conference USA ====


=== Women's sponsored sports by school ===
Departing members in pink.


==== Women's varsity sports not sponsored by Conference USA ====


=== Football ===
Conference USA used a divisional format for football from 2005 to 2021.

 For the upcoming season, see 2025 Conference USA football season.

CUSA champions

Bowl games
Through the 2023 season, the highest-ranked champion from the so-called "Group of Five" conferences (The American, CUSA, MAC, Mountain West, and Sun Belt) was guaranteed a berth in one of the non-semifinal bowls of the College Football Playoff if the group's top team was not in the playoff. Starting in 2024, at least one Group of Five conference champion will receive a berth in the expanded 12-team CFP.

For the 2014–19 seasons, Conference USA was guaranteed at least five of the following bowl games. Stadiums and names reflect those in use during that period.

Rivalries
Current or former CUSA in-conference rivalries:


=== Men's basketball ===
 For the most recent season, see 2024–25 Conference USA men's basketball season.

This list goes through the 2022–23 season.


=== Women's basketball ===

This list goes through the 2022–23 season.


=== Baseball ===


== Championships ==


=== Current CUSA champions ===
"RS" is regular season, "T" is tournament.


=== National champions ===
Only two current CUSA members, one full member and one associate, have won national team championships while representing the conference, both in bowling. Full member Jacksonville State won the 2024 NCAA championship in its first season of both varsity bowling and CUSA membership, and associate member Youngstown State won the 2025 NCAA title. The only other school to have won such a championship while a CUSA member at any level is Marshall, which moved to the Sun Belt Conference in 2022. Marshall won the 2020–21 men's soccer championship in May 2021 (with the tournament having moved from its normal schedule in fall 2020 to spring 2021 due to COVID-19).
The following current and future CUSA teams have won national championships when they were not affiliated with CUSA. Current associate members, indicated in italics, are listed with championships they won in their CUSA sports.


== Facilities ==
Departing members are denoted in red.

Notes


== Athletic department revenue by school ==
Total revenue includes ticket sales, contributions and donations, rights and licensing, student fees, school funds and all other sources including TV income, camp income, concessions, and novelties.
Total expenses includes coach and staff salaries, scholarships, buildings and grounds, maintenance, utilities and rental fees, recruiting, team travel, equipment and uniforms, conference dues, and insurance.
The following table shows institutional reporting to the United States Department of Education as shown on the DOE Equity in Athletics website for the 2023–24 academic year.
Incoming school in light gray.


== Media ==
In 2016, CUSA began a long-term television contract with lead partners ESPN and CBS Sports Network, with ESPN carrying 5 football games and the football championship game; and CBSSN carrying 6 football games, 5 basketball games, and both the men's and women's basketball championship games. CUSA also renewed and expanded its partnership with American Sports Network; owned and operated by Sinclair Broadcast Group, ASN will carry between 15 and 30 football games; between 13 and 55 men's basketball games; and between 2 and 5 women's basketball games. ASN will also carry 10 events in other C-USA sports.
The conference also entered into a contract with beIN Sports for 10 football games (marking the first domestic American football rights the network has ever acquired, and the first broadcast rights deal it had ever entered into with a college conference), 10 men's and 10 women's basketball games, 12 baseball and 12 softball games, 10 men's and 10 women's soccer games (excluding conference men's soccer games at Kentucky and South Carolina, covered by their primary conference's contract), and 10 women's volleyball games.
The total values of the 2016 contracts are notably lower than those of the previous contracts (which included Fox Sports).
Former men's soccer associate members Kentucky and South Carolina have an agreement with their primary conference for other sports to carry all home matches online through the SEC Network service. This included all of those teams' matches against CUSA opponents before the two schools moved men's soccer to the Sun Belt Conference in 2022. ESPN and the SEC Network had first rights to all CUSA home men's soccer matches featuring both schools.
In 2017 American Sports Network and Campus Insiders merged creating Stadium.  Stadium's C-USA content will be available to stream on Twitter and Pluto TV.   In 2017 Stadium completed a deal with Facebook to exclusively stream some C-USA football games.  In 2017 CUSA entered an agreement with the streaming subscription service FloSports to stream three football games.


=== CUSA.tv ===
In 2016 CUSA partnered with SIDEARM Sports to create a subscription based streaming service named CUSA.tv.  In a statement CUSA Commissioner Judy MacLeod said, "Thanks to our partnership with SIDEARM Sports, this new site showcases a clean modern look with easy access to information and we are proud to offer live content and original feature stories through our CUSA.tv." Various sports including football, basketball, and baseball will exclusively air on CUSA.tv when they are not picked up by other networks.


=== Return to ESPN and CBS Sports Network ===
In 2022, CUSA signed a new media rights agreement establishing CBS Sports Network and ESPN as primary rights holders beginning in 2023. As part of this agreement, CUSA agrees to schedule eight midweek football games per season during the month of October, to be aired on ESPN platforms including both linear ESPN channels and the ESPN+ streaming outlet. CBS Sports Network continues with tier 1 selection status for CUSA football and men's basketball 


== Academics ==
A majority of the Conference's members are ranked as Tier One National Universities in U.S. News & World Report's 2025 Best Colleges rankings.
Of the incoming members:

Delaware is in the Carnegie Foundation's "very high research activity" classification, and tied for #76 in US News' "National Universities" classification.
Jacksonville State is in the Carnegie Foundation's "Master's Colleges and Universities (Larger Programs)" classification, and is not ranked by US News as a national university, instead being classified as a Southern "Regional University".
Kennesaw State is in the Carnegie Foundation's "high research activity" classification, and ranked between 331 and 440 in US News' "National Universities" classification.
Liberty is in the Carnegie Foundation's "Doctoral/Professional" classification, and also ranked between 331 and 440 in US News' "National Universities" classification.
New Mexico State is in the Carnegie Foundation's "high research activity" classification, and tied for #263 in US News' "National Universities" classification.
Sam Houston is in the Carnegie Foundation's "high research activity" classification, and also in a tie for #263 in US News' "National Universities" classification.

Notes


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website