Deicide is an American death metal band from Tampa, Florida. Formed in 1987 by drummer/composer Steve Asheim and guitarist brothers Eric and Brian Hoffman as "Carnage", then hiring bassist/vocalist/lyricist  Glen Benton and becoming "Amon". They changed the band name to Deicide in 1989. The band rose to mainstream success in 1992 with their second album Legion, and is credited as the second-best-selling death metal band of the Soundscan Era, after Cannibal Corpse.
Since their debut album in 1990, Deicide has released thirteen studio albums, one live album, two compilation albums and two live DVDs. In November 2003, their first two albums, Deicide and Legion, were ranked second and third place respectively in best-selling death metal albums of the SoundScan era.
Deicide has been called "Florida's most notorious and despised death metal export." The band's first three studio albums -- Deicide, Legion and Once Upon the Cross—are considered classics in the death metal genre. Deicide is notorious for its lyrical themes, which cover topics such as Satanism, anti-Christianity and blasphemy. The band's lyrics as well as the band members' personal lives have resulted in bans, lawsuits, criticism, and controversy from religious groups, political groups, animal rights activists, and the general public. Additionally, many of the band members have been arrested for various reasons.


== History ==


=== Formation and early years (1987–1989) ===
 Original guitarists Brian and Eric Hoffman met drummer Steve Asheim while in high school. During this time, Asheim moved his drum kit into Eric's bedroom. The boys would habitually skip school, and as soon as the Hoffmans' parents left the house to go to work, they would sneak back into the house and practice Slayer, Sodom and Destruction covers.
Deicide was officially formed in Tampa, Florida on July 21, 1987, after Brian Hoffman called Glen Benton, replying to an advertisement the latter had placed in a local music magazine. The original bassist, named Ron, had been dismissed for not showing up for practice. Hoffman and his brother, along with drummer Steve Asheim, had previously played together as the band "Carnage", which was in need of a bassist and vocalist. Carnage played cover songs by Slayer, Exodus, Celtic Frost and Dark Angel. Within a month, they had recorded the Feasting the Beast 8-track demo in Benton's garage and had started playing the occasional gig in the Tampa area. In 1989, Amon recorded their second demo, Sacrificial, at Morrisound with producer Scott Burns.
Malevolent Creation guitarist Phil Fasciana recalls an early Carnage show: "It was like Slayer intensified a thousand times. [...] I guess Carnage had hollowed out a mannequin and filled it with fuckin' blood and guts from a butcher shop... and then they threw the fuckin' thing on the floor. Morbid Angel had these pit bulls with them back then and they were just tearing the meat up. It was a really weird scene, man. There was blood and meat everywhere." The Hoffman brothers said that they would let the animal viscera sit in the sun all day prior to its use in their stage theatrics.


=== Roadrunner Records releases (1989–2004) ===

While still under the name Carnage, Benton reportedly stormed into Roadrunner Records' A&R man Monte Conner's office and slammed the demo down on his desk, belting out "sign us, you fucking asshole!" The next day contracts were issued to the band. This version of events was partially later denied by Benton, who claimed he indeed visited the office but never used profanities. In 1989 the band's name was changed to Deicide at the request of Roadrunner Records due to multiple other bands already using "Carnage" as a band name.
Deicide then released their self-titled debut album, also produced by Scott Burns at Morrisound, in 1990. Their debut featured re-recorded versions of all six of the Sacrificial tunes that had secured them their record deal. The band did not tour on the album because Glen Benton felt the band was worth more than the monetary offers they were receiving from promoters.
Deicide's second full-length album Legion was released on June 9, 1992.
In 1992, Deicide was on tour in Europe with Atrocity from Germany and Gorefest, a Dutch death metal band. In Stockholm, during the Gorefest set, a bomb was discovered on-stage. It exploded in the club in which they were playing. The bomb was located to the rear of the stage, behind a heavy, fireproof door. The explosion was big enough to deform the door and blow it off its hinges. Deicide managed to play three songs before the police decided to stop the concert and evacuate the club. At first, Benton blamed that attack on the Norwegian black metal scene, where Deicide's brand of death metal was despised by some. Many people blamed animal rights activists who were angered at Deicide's lyrical themes of animal sacrifice.
Deicide's third studio album Once upon the Cross was released in 1995. Benton was quoted in an interview saying: "I think people are taking [the band] more serious[ly], and they're getting scared in that. You know, [the heaviness is] not going away. You know, it's one of the kind of things where [they'll] think 'well, maybe the next record they're gonna fuckin start softening.' I tell everybody man, the only things that get soft are butter and shit, man. We're not getting soft."
The band's fourth studio album Serpents of the Light was released on October 21, 1997.
The band's first live album, When Satan Lives, was released on October 20, 1998.
The band's fifth studio album, Insineratehymn, was released on June 27, 2000.
Deicide left Roadrunner Records after its sixth studio album, In Torment in Hell, which was released on July 31, 2001. Glen Benton recalled: "Roadrunner, on a personal level, treated me great. They hated particular two members of the band, but they treated me and Steve great. If I ever needed money, all I’d do was make a phone call and it’s be in my account before six o’clock at night. They helped me through my first divorce, financially. They paid to have my tonsillectomy done around the time of the first album when I couldn’t tour because my tonsils were rotting in my throat."
In 2003, Asheim and the Hoffmans were detained at the Canadian border by authorities due to a misunderstanding, which caused the planned concert in Detroit to be cancelled. Media reports indicated that they had been incarcerated on drug and weapons charges, however Earache Records quickly dispelled these rumors. The label made a statement that said: "Deicide were forced to miss their October 21 show in Detroit, Michigan, due to a misunderstanding with officials at the Canadian border. According to frontman Glen Benton who was travelling separately from his three bandmates, Benton arrived at the Detroit venue in time for soundcheck, only to find drummer Steve Asheim and the Hoffman brothers nowhere in sight. It was soon revealed that the tardy parties were being detained by officials at the Canadian border and they would not make it to Detroit in time for the show. The men were held at the border over night and were finally released early the following morning, with no charges against them. Deicide would like to sincerely apologize to all the Detroit fans, and promise to make it up to them soon."


=== Departures of Eric and Brian Hoffman (2004) ===

Eric and Brian Hoffman made their final studio appearance with Deicide on 2004's Scars of the Crucifix, which was the band's first release on Earache Records. On November 25, 2004, the brothers departed from the band due to animosity relating to royalties and publishing. Steve Asheim stated that by this point, he had lost "business trust" in them, and stated that leading up to their departure, they could not even be relied upon to show up for live performances.
The Hoffmans (at least initially) denied quitting the band on their own accord, and insisted that they were fired. According to Eric Hoffman, "No one quit Deicide. We split all royalties and publishing, or no deal. Glen wrote one song musically: ‘Trifixion’, then I arranged it, in his whole career and one part in ‘Dead By Dawn’. Yes, very brutal." Glen Benton contested this claim, telling Blabbermouth in 2006 that the brothers promptly quit the band upon receiving publishing checks for Scars and realizing that they had only received payment for a handful of the album's tracks. Benton also claimed that Eric Hoffman had made threats of physical violence towards himself and Steve Asheim, and vowed to defend himself should he catch the guitarist trespassing on his property. He said: "We gotta deal with Eric threatening Steve, driving to his house and screaming outside his window at 10:30 at night, making threatening phone calls, talking shit on Blabbermouth about Steve's dad dying, and all this other bullshit. Eric knows better than to come over here, though — he knows I shoot first and ask questions later."

They later attempted to sue Glen Benton for the rights to the Deicide name. Eric Hoffman recalled, "We were actually going to use the Deicide name [for the new band], but [Glen and Steve] got on the bandwagon faster than us. [...] They basically took the name, and Glen writes all the lyrics, so the kids are familiar with that." In response, Benton countersued the Hoffmans in order to remove their names from the band's trademark. Benton told Decibel, "They can't do a goddamned thing to me, dude. I own the fucking name. They went behind my back and filed on my trademark, so I'm in the process of suing them to get their names off it. And I will win. They abandoned their jobs, and now they wanna come back. Well, there's no coming back, man. Sorry." According to Eric Hoffman, Benton "says if he sees me, he's gonna shoot me and ask questions later. He hates me more than Jesus." Benton later compared his relationship with the Hoffmans to a "bad marriage," and was quoted saying: "When you're in a bad marriage, it just ain't working out. So people have to go on their way." He also stated his belief that Deicide was stronger without the brothers, saying, "They're just a couple of losers, and they rode on me and Steve's coattails for all these years."

The Hoffman brothers later went on to reform Amon. Eric Hoffman described the sound as "a little bit more technical" than some of the music they created in Deicide. He explained: "It's not too intricate, so it's still catchy at the same time. You'll still have a couple of classic Deicide beginnings, and then it'll go into some killer technical, in-your-face shit."
In 2019, Eric Hoffman made a threatening Facebook post directed at Benton, calling him a fraud, and vowing to collect the royalties from Scars of the Crucifix. He said: "Yes[,] we will kick your ass Glen any time[,] any place. I will collect my money[,] [you] clearly fraud scum fuck. You say gloves are off your better put some on, the anger in me, your head will spin around like the fucking exorcist, you know where I live, welcome anytime collecting all my merch for royalties for 20 years and royalties for 13 on scars believe me I will not let you get away with this, we will meet again, anger is building and has it’s vengeance." Benton responded on Into the Combine podcast: "Every time we do a record, I guess [Eric] loses his mind over there and he can’t handle hearing us proceeding without them. It’s been what — 14, 15 years since those two departed, and they did one shitty album and tried ripping off the fans, charged them for videos and bullshit like that. And then from there, they’ve done two shitty shows here in the state of Florida, and from what I was told, they almost canceled those. So their track record speaks for itself. Our track record speaks for itself. When you don’t have the original singer, then you are the official cover band. You wanna make yourself look even more stupid than you already do, by all means, go ahead."

In 2022, Brian Hoffman made a lengthy post on Facebook pertaining to the incident, going as far as to suggest that Benton wears a toupee in secrecy. He was quoted saying: "After what happened when Glen Benton fucking took scars royalties for 20 years and all Deicide merchandise I will find you and hunt you down like the animal you are. I have no label and did my last album for the fans out of my own savings and will do it again with without label. I now pronounce [a] curse on his hair piece[.] Glen Michael Benton[,] you will be history soon and Steve will hire new singer. Also remember this[,] I am Deicide [and] you are a disgusting individual that doesn’t care about anyone but himself."
Benton again reflected on the split in a 2022 interview with Chris Garza of Suicide Silence: "The way [the Hoffmans] conducted themselves was unprofessional and brought a black eye to me and Steve, which we didn't deserve it because we were doing all the work. [...] I was ready to quit [...] I was doing Vital and I had just had enough of their bullshit. I was ready to go, so when they quit the band they did me a favor. [...] And then they wanted to burn it down when they left, too. They wanted to burn the fucking thing to the ground. It's like, all me and Steve's hard work they wanted to burn it down to the ground."
Benton also suggested that although his relationship with the Hoffmans was damaged beyond repair, the situation could be significantly improved by a simple apology. However, he stated that he did not expect to receive an apology from the brothers at any point in the indefinite future. He surmised: "They don't care, or maybe they feel that there's been so much damage done that something as simple as an apology might fix things. But I mean, if they're that fucking stupid, ya know?" He then stated: "There's things that you just can't come back from. [...] You know when you're saying it – you know when you're doing it – that there's no coming back from it – that you've permanently stepped over that line forever. [...] You can't go through life, man, just hurting people and stepping on toes and burning bridges and that, I mean, coz it's all gonna come back to you eventually. You know? And, you reap what you sow, man."
In a 2024 interview, Asheim stated that he had heard rumors that relations between Eric and Brian Hoffman had deteriorated, and that they had not been in contact with one another. He commented, "it's fucking comical fodder more than anything at this point."


=== Post-Hoffman brothers period (2004–present) ===

Shortly after the Hoffmans' departure, the guitar roles were then filled by former Cannibal Corpse guitarist Jack Owen, and Vital Remains guitarist Dave Suzuki. Following the tour, Suzuki was replaced by guitarist Ralph Santolla. Santolla stated he was a Catholic, which had received a small amount of shock and ridicule from some metal fans. In spite of this, Deicide's eighth studio album The Stench of Redemption, which was released on August 22, 2006, received positive reviews from critics, who praised the album's guitar work and emphasis on melody.

Speaking of how Owen's presence affected the band's dynamic, Benton said: "When those two morons left, Jack brought stability, a calm, a stress-free environment for me. 'Cause I was ready to quit the band; I was done. I had enough of them two morons; I was done. That's why I started doing Vital Remains. I was at that point. I had enough. And Ralph being in the band, that was just… I knew when we brought Ralph in he was never gonna be permanent, because he's just a fucking mess of a human being... Jack, though… We're like family. The band is a family. I treat this band like I would my family. I don't pay myself more than anybody; we split everything equally, four ways. [...] I like to sleep at night. I couldn't treat people like a hired gun and shit. You know what I mean?! To me, that's just… When bands do that, it's, like, 'Who are you as far as…? On a human level, how are you better than anybody else? Why should you be paid more?' And people can respect me for that, or they can hate me for it. I run it like a business, you know what I mean?! And everybody's happy. This lineup is not gonna go away."In January 2007, Benton left the European tour and returned home to the United States as a result of legal issues at home. Asheim announced that Seth van Loo, from opening act Severe Torture, and Garbaty "Yaha", from the Polish death metal band Dissenter, would be replacing Benton starting on January 9 in the Netherlands, until Benton could rejoin the tour. Benton rejoined the band in Paris on January 13. On May 24, 2007, it was announced Ralph Santolla had left Deicide. Subsequently, he joined Florida's Obituary and appeared on their album Xecutioner's Return as well as the tour. On July 20, 2007, guitarist Jack Owen announced that Deicide would be "on hiatus" and he had temporarily joined Ohio-based deathrash band Estuary for touring purposes. The band embarked on a Balkan tour, dubbed "Balkans AssassiNation Tour", in October 2007 alongside Krisiun, Incantation and Inactive Messiah. Owen called the tour a "death metal vacation."
By November 2007, Deicide began work on their ninth studio album at Florida's Morrisound Studios. Entitled Till Death Do Us Part, the follow-up to The Stench of Redemption, promised to be the band's "most savage and aggressive [offering] to date", according to a press release. Drummer Steve Asheim recorded drum tracks and Benton started recording vocals in December 2007. In April 2008, two songs off the album were posted online. It was finally released on April 28, 2008. As the record was coming out, Benton considered retiring from music, in the midst of personal matters including a custody battle.
On January 6, 2009, Deicide posted a blog on their official Myspace page saying they had signed a worldwide record deal with Century Media, with Ralph Santolla returning to the band for a European tour. They were said to be working on material for a summer 2010 release. In early 2009, they toured with Vital Remains and Order of Ennead. Guitarist Kevin Quirion of Order of Ennead joined the band in the summer of 2009. In June 2010, Glen Benton revealed that the next Deicide album was to be titled To Hell with God. It was produced by Mark Lewis at Audiohammer Studios in Sanford, Florida, and was released on February 15, 2011.
Guitarist Ralph Santolla left Deicide in 2011. Glen Benton explained on Facebook: "Ralph didn't make us better, he never wrote one part and he threw up all over the studio drunk when he did his leads, fuck that drunk, Kevin is back full time, we would rather have a tight sound than that drunk fucking his way through the set. [...] Oh the whole 'I am a Christian' thing with him is total bullshit... the guy just uses that shit to upset myself and the fans... don't buy it, the guy couldn't tell ya the last time he went to church... The fucked up thing is, that he thinks it's fine to go on stage a drunken mess, me and Steve have more respect for the fans then to let him make us look bad, fuck the guy, total drunk. Just to get the story straight cause the bum will deny it, I kicked his drunk ass off the bus in Italy... and finished the tour as a three piece... that's how bad it was with the drunkard... I would rather sound tight than to have him slopping through the songs another night..."
The eleventh studio album In the Minds of Evil was released on November 26, 2013. On October 9, 2014, The Village Voice reported that Deicide had started working on new material for their twelfth studio album.
Deicide toured with Entombed A.D. and Hate Eternal in the spring of 2015.

By November 2016, it became apparent that guitarist Jack Owen was no longer in the band, and had been replaced by Monstrosity guitarist Mark English without an official announcement. Owen said, "it was a problem with new stuff I was writing. I walked into practice and Steve had re-recorded it and changed notes here and there for three or four songs that I had. It was stupid at the time. But he's, like, 'Hey, I changed the notes so I get writing credit.' And I'm, like, 'That's not how the songs go, though.' And Glen's like, 'It is now.' [Laughs] So I literally walked out and ghosted them. [Laughs] Later on, it was like, 'Hey, dude, you're out.'" Benton said Ashiem took two of Owen's tracks and turned them into "one good song." Ashiem recounted, "We were just kind of writing the record, and we were going over the songs. Me and Glen, we were, like, 'We wanna redo the songs.' It's like we had completed them — about nine or twelve, whatever how many songs. They were all right, but we weren't really psyched about them. So we decided to rewrite them. And Jack didn't really like it. And he kind of left one day and just never came back. So that was that. [...] I haven't talked to the guy in almost a year." Benton later expressed regret for “being a smartass” during the incident. Owen went on to join Six Feet Under in February 2017. Benton has stated that the band has “no hard feelings” towards Owen and that they were happy for him in joining Six Feet Under.

On March 10, 2017, Deicide announced a short U.S. tour which would begin in May and also issued an update on the album: "the new record is almost completed, right now its down to scheduling, this run of shows were setting up is to introduce and work in our new guitarist Mark English, that and I need a break from this thing called Florida…". Deicide's twelfth studio album, Overtures of Blasphemy, was released on September 14, 2018.
On June 6, 2018, former guitarist Ralph Santolla died due to complications following a heart attack and was taken off life support since being in a coma for a week. Benton stated that the two had "made peace" prior to Santolla's death, going as far to say "I hope he's in a better place and I hope he's happy."
In February 2019, Deicide parted ways with Mark English and replaced him with Autumn's End vocalist/guitarist Chris Cannella.
On April 17, 2021, the band performed in front of an audience of full capacity at The Verona in New Port Richey amid the COVID-19 pandemic, as all restrictions for businesses were lifted and mask mandate enforcements for local cities in Florida were removed as the state was moved into Stage 3 in late September 2020. A U.S. tour followed soon after, with Kataklysm, Internal Bleeding and Begat the Nephilim.
On January 19, 2022, Chris Cannella left the band and was replaced by new guitarist Taylor Nordberg. The thirteenth album Banished by Sin was released through Reigning Phoenix Music on April 26, 2024. It was the "album of the month" on metallian.com. The band toured Europe in 2024.
On May 18, 2025, guitarist Kevin Quirion announced his departure from Deicide for personal reasons, and would be replaced with Jadran "Conan" Gonzalez.


== Artistry ==


=== Musical style and influences ===
Dom Lawson of Metal Hammer wrote, "in terms of defining the sound of Floridian death metal in the early 90s, few bands are either as iconic or as notorious." Despite this, frontman Glen Benton prefers not to use the "death metal" terminology. Greg Prato of AllMusic loosely referred to Deicide as blackened death metal. Additionally, Deicide's albums following their debut album have been called brutal death metal.
According to Benton, Deicide was initially influenced by extreme metal acts such as Venom, Possessed and Death. Original guitarist Eric Hoffman was introduced to extreme metal by his brother Brian while the two were in high school. Eric recalled: "My brother came into my room and showed me some Bathory and Sodom and some Slayer, and I was like, 'what the fuck is this shit?!' I got into it." Eric, who was slightly older than his brother, was also influenced by Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath and Yngwie Malmsteen. Brian stated that he was influenced by "anything satanic, basically. Anything fucking evil. [...] Anything crazy."
Music journalist T Coles assessed, "though few would accuse Deicide of having pop sensibilities, there was something fun and catchy about them. This is in part thanks to Glen Benton's vocals; individual words are barked out, retaining the evil vibe, and the staccato delivery builds tension before breaking it back down with chaotic guitar solos." Benton's high shrieks have drawn comparisons to black metal. Both the Hoffman brothers tended to play technical solos at fast speeds and with overlapping riffs, which allowed Deicide to achieve the definitive heavy sound and complex song structures the band would become known for. Their guitar tone preferences heard on early Deicide releases have been noted for their extreme high frequency. According to Zeke Ferrington of Gear Gods, "It sounds like they plugged their pedals into a BBE Sonic Maximizer, then straight into the [mixing] desk with a HPF at 800hz and an upper mid boost."


=== Lyrical themes ===
Deicide's songs have been described as "misanthropic odes to Satan." The band's lyrics explore vehement anti-Christian themes, as well as themes of blasphemy, Satanism, suicide, human sacrifice, deicide, and hell. Some of the band's song titles include "Death to Jesus", "Fuck Your God", "Kill the Christian", "Behead the Prophet", "Scars of the Crucifix", and "Christ Don't Care". Despite this, drummer Steve Asheim has denied belief in Satan or any other fire deity, explaining: "The whole point of Satanic music is to blaspheme against the Church [...] Life is short enough without having to waste it doing this whole organized praying, hoping, wishing-type thing on some superior being."


== Controversy and censorship ==
Deicide has received considerable controversy throughout their career. Most of the controversy surrounded frontman Benton for a rash of shocking interviews and wild statements. Benton has repeatedly branded an inverted cross into his forehead on at least 12 different occasions. During an interview with NME magazine, he shot and killed a squirrel with a pellet gun to prevent any further damage to his electrical system in the attic at the location the interview was held. This act garnered negative attention from critics and some animal rights activists. Benton had professed beliefs in theistic Satanism during Deicide's early years, claimed to slaughter rodents for fun, and that he held beliefs in demonic possession and that he was possessed. Such statements had eventually been concluded as tongue-in-cheek and little more than sensationalism by band members questioned alternatively. Additionally, Benton claimed in the early 1990s that he would commit suicide at the age of 33 to "mirror" a lifespan opposite that of Jesus Christ. However, he passed that age in 2000 and did not commit suicide, rebutting in 2006 that these statements had been "asinine remarks" and that "only cowards and losers" choose to kill themselves.
Deicide has been banned from playing in several venues (such as Valparaiso, Chile over a promotional poster featuring Jesus Christ with a bullet hole in his forehead) and with various festivals such as Hellfest, after several graves had been spray-painted with "When Satan Rules His World", a reference to a song from Deicide's 1995 album Once upon the Cross. In addition, their music video for "Homage for Satan", which features blood-splattered zombies on a rampaging mission to capture a priest, was banned from UK music TV channel Scuzz.
Deicide also caused controversy when Benton tossed rotting animal meat into the crowd. Benton recalled, “I didn’t think playing shows with rotting meat as part of our set-up was gonna cause that much of a shitstorm. Within three shows of that stuff I had the authorities bearing down on me, so it was a very short-lived moment in Deicide history.” Steve Asheim said that the authorities confiscated the animal entrails and had them sent to a lab to tested because they thought they were human. He said: “Scaring the shit out of people was what we were trying to do, so we achieved that!" Benton later reflected: 'We all do stupid shit when we’re kids and people at record companies made more out of it than was there. Yeah, it was sensationalized, stupid stuff. And I just played into it like I was being asked. As far as the animal guts I threw into the crowd and everything, yeah, we did that shit in the early days. When you're young and you're a kid all you think is just, 'Let's be as sick as fuckin’ possible!' But you're not thinking about all the people you might harm in the fuckin’ process. And then when you get a little older you go, “Wow, man. That was really fuckin’ stupid of me to throw all that shit on fuckin’ people. It could have made some of them really sick.' So you grow up. We all grow up."


== Band members ==


=== Recording timeline ===


=== Timeline ===


== Discography ==

Deicide (1990)
Legion (1992)
Once upon the Cross (1995)
Serpents of the Light (1997)
Insineratehymn (2000)
In Torment in Hell (2001)
Scars of the Crucifix (2004)
The Stench of Redemption (2006)
Till Death Do Us Part (2008)
To Hell with God (2011)
In the Minds of Evil (2013)
Overtures of Blasphemy (2018)
Banished by Sin (2024)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Mudrian, Albert (2004). Choosing Death:The Improbable History of Death Metal and Grindcore, Feral House, ISBN 1-932595-04-X.


== External links ==

 Media related to Deicide at Wikimedia Commons

Deicide on Facebook
Deicide at AllMusic