Eduardo Luiz Saverin ( SAV-ər-in, Brazilian Portuguese: [eduˈaʁdu luˈis saveˈɾĩ] ; born March 19, 1982) is a Brazilian entrepreneur, investor, and philanthropist, known for co-founding Facebook and later establishing the venture capital firm B Capital, which invests in transformative technology & AI, healthcare, and energy & resilience technologies. As of October 2025, his net worth is estimated at US$66.6 billion, making him the wealthiest Brazilian and the richest person in Singapore, as well as one of the Top 50 wealthiest people in the world.


== Early life and education ==
Eduardo Luiz Saverin was born in São Paulo to a wealthy Jewish-Brazilian family, which later moved to Rio de Janeiro. Saverin's father, Roberto Saverin, was a businessman working in clothing, shipping, energy, and real estate. His mother, Sandra, was a psychologist. He has two siblings. His Romanian-born grandfather, Eugenio Saverin (born Eugen Saverin), is the founder of Tip Top, a chain of children's clothing shops. In 1993, the family immigrated to the US, settling in Miami, Florida. Eduardo Saverin became a naturalized US citizen in 1998, when he was 15-16 years old.
Saverin attended Gulliver Preparatory School in Miami. He then attended Harvard University, where he was a resident of Eliot House, a member of the Phoenix S.K. Club, and president of the Harvard Investment Association. While an undergraduate at Harvard, Saverin used his interest in meteorology to predict hurricane patterns and made $300,000 via investment in oil futures. In 2006, Saverin graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University with a Bachelor of Arts in economics. He is a member of the Alpha Epsilon Pi fraternity (Eta Psi chapter of Harvard University).


== Career ==
During his junior year at Harvard, Saverin met fellow Harvard undergraduate, sophomore Mark Zuckerberg. Noting the lack of a dedicated social networking website for Harvard students, the two worked together to launch Facebook in 2004. They each agreed to invest $1,000 in the site. Later, Zuckerberg and Saverin each agreed to invest another $18,000 in the operation. As co-founder, Saverin held the role of chief financial officer and business manager. On May 15, 2012, Business Insider obtained and released an exclusive email from Zuckerberg detailing how he cut Saverin from Facebook and diluted his stake. Zuckerberg privately stated at the time, "Eduardo is refusing to co-operate at all ... We basically now need to sign over our intellectual property to a new company and just take the lawsuit ... I'm just going to cut him out and then settle with him. And he'll get something I'm sure, but he deserves something ... He has to sign stuff for investments and he's lagging and I can't take the lag." Zuckerberg's attorney warned Zuckerberg that the dilution might trigger a lawsuit for breach of fiduciary duty. Facebook filed a lawsuit against Saverin, arguing that the stock-purchase agreement Saverin signed in October 2005 was invalid. Saverin then filed a suit against Zuckerberg, alleging Zuckerberg spent Facebook's money (Saverin's money) on personal expenses over the summer. In 2009, both suits were settled out of court. Terms of the settlement were not disclosed and the company affirmed Saverin's title as co-founder of Facebook. Saverin signed a non-disclosure contract after the settlement.
In 2010, Saverin co-founded Aporta, an online portal for charity. 
In 2015, Saverin and Raj Ganguly founded B Capital, a global multi-stage venture capital firm. The company invests in early to late-stage technology and AI, healthcare, and energy & resilience companies across The United States and Asia.
In addition to forming B Capital, in early 2020 Saverin invested in Antler, an early-stage VC fund and startup accelerator founded by his friend and Harvard classmate, Magnus Grimeland.


=== In media ===
Saverin is played by Andrew Garfield in the film The Social Network, which is based on Ben Mezrich's The Accidental Billionaires.


== Personal life ==
Saverin emigrated to Singapore in 2009. Saverin and Elaine Andriejanssen, an Indonesian national of Chinese descent and with partial Dutch ancestry, became engaged on March 27, 2014, were married on June 25, 2015, and have one child. They met while Saverin was studying at Harvard and Andriejanssen at Tufts nearby. Andriejanssen, who works in the finance industry, comes from a wealthy family that runs several businesses in Indonesia.
Saverin renounced his U.S. citizenship in September 2011, thereby avoiding an estimated US$700 million in capital gains taxes. This generated media attention and controversy. Saverin claimed that he renounced his citizenship because of his "interest in working and living in Singapore", and denied that he left the U.S. to avoid paying taxes.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Saverin, Eduardo (October 15, 2010). "Facebook Co-Founder Speaks Publicly: What I Learned From Watching 'The Social Network'". CNBC.


== External links ==

Eduardo Saverin on Facebook
Profile at Forbes