Finger on the App was a smartphone app that involved multiple players holding down on the app for as long as possible with the person holding down the longest winning a USD$25,000 prize.


== History ==
The app was launched on Apple's App Store on June 30, 2020, at 3:00 PM Eastern Standard Time, it would be a collaboration with MrBeast and the Brooklyn-based art collective MSCHF. The app being called MSCHF's 24th drop, and also uncheatable as MSCHF's head of strategy, Daniel Greenberg, stated "We've taken God knows how many precautions to prevent cheating, this app is uncheatable.". The game started with 1.3 million players and only after 48 hours (2 days), there were 15 players left playing the game. The app was active for only 70 hours after its release with it ending on July 3, at exactly 1:15 PM Eastern Standard Time, with four players being awarded with $20,000 respectively as they tied for the first place. At its peak, 450,000 people were playing the game at the same time and involved in winning the contest. MrBeast said in a tweet about the winners directly as the contest ended "Dear the four remaining contestants with your finger still on the app, I'm ending it here. Three days is insane! You ALL win and will ALL receive $20,000! CONGRATULATIONS!". In total, over a million users were active on the app. On TikTok, videos with the hashtag #fingerontheapp had 105.9 million views collectively.


== Finger on the App 2 ==

MrBeast announced Finger on the App 2, a sequel to the original game, on December 26, 2020, with the initial release date being December 29, 2020. Around 2 and a half months after the initial announcement, a new release date was made which was March 20, 2021, at 5 PM Eastern Standard Time with the ending prize being USD$100,000, with the countdown being put on the MrBeast Games website, the delay was due to the system of the app crashing because of a massive amount of downloads. Rules also provided that players must be at least 18 years old and reside in either the United States, Canada (excluding the province of Quebec), and Mexico with it being released for Android on the Google Play Store and for iOS on the App Store. Another major difference between the original app and Finger on the App 2 is there were now in-game purchases where users can buy extra lives and a battle mode, an ingame PvP mode, where users could earn cookies, a form of ingame currency, in order to buy extra lives instead of spending money. At the end of the challenge, which was 2 days and 3 hours after the initial release, a user by the name of Swagbacon123 received the USD$100,000 prize after an announcement in a tweet by MrBeast. The second place user was also awarded USD$20,000 as stated in the same tweet.


=== App glitches ===
According to many sources, the app had many problems including touch sensory issues and in-app purchasing problems with those who bought extra lives never receiving extra lives  and unable to get refunds. After the challenge however, MrBeast directly offered refunds to anyone who bought extra lives.


== References ==