Gary Alan Sinise (; born March 17, 1955) is an American actor. He has won a Primetime Emmy Award, a Golden Globe Award, a Tony Award and four Screen Actors Guild Awards, and has been nominated for an Academy Award. He has received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Sinise has also received awards and honors for his extensive humanitarian work and involvement with charitable organizations, notably the Gary Sinise Foundation, of which he is the founder and Chairman of the Board of Directors. He also founded the Lt. Dan Band (named after his character in Forrest Gump), which plays at U.S. military bases around the world.
Sinise's career started on stage with the Steppenwolf Theatre Company in 1983 when he directed and starred in a production of Sam Shepard's True West for which he earned an Obie Award. Sinise directed Orphans by Lyle Kessler on Broadway in 1985. Also in 1985, he earned the Regional Theatre Tony Award alongside the Steppenwolf Theatre Company. He also received Tony Award nominations for his performances in The Grapes of Wrath (1988) and One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (2001).
Sinise starred as George Milton in the 1992 film adaptation of John Steinbeck's novel Of Mice and Men. He also directed and produced the film. Sinise received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Lieutenant Dan Taylor in Forrest Gump (1994). He also appeared in Ron Howard's Apollo 13 (1995), Ransom (1996), Frank Darabont's The Green Mile (1999) and Impostor (2002). 
On television, Sinise portrayed Harry S. Truman in Truman (1995), a portrayal that won him a Golden Globe Award, and played the title role in George Wallace, for which he received a Primetime Emmy Award. Sinise is widely known for his leading role as Detective Mac Taylor in the long-running CBS series CSI: NY (2004–13). He also played Special Agent Jack Garrett in Criminal Minds: Beyond Borders (2016–17).


== Early life ==
Sinise was born in Blue Island, Illinois, the son of Robert L. Sinise (born 1931), a film editor, and Mylles (Alsip) Sinise. His paternal grandfather was of Italian descent. Sinise's great-grandfather, Vito Sinisi, emigrated to the United States from Ripacandida in the Italian region of Basilicata. Sinise briefly attended Glenbard West High School in Glen Ellyn, Illinois and later graduated from Highland Park High School in Highland Park, Illinois.
He attended Illinois State University in Normal, Illinois and has been a supportive alumnus of the university.


== Career ==

In 1974, Sinise and two friends, Terry Kinney and Jeff Perry, founded the Steppenwolf Theatre Company in Chicago, Illinois. Since then, Steppenwolf has showcased the talents of notable actors such as Joan Allen, Kevin Anderson, Gary Cole, Ethan Hawke, Glenne Headly, John Malkovich, John Mahoney, Laurie Metcalf, Martha Plimpton, Jim True-Frost, and William Petersen. Sinise honed his acting and directing skills at Steppenwolf.
In 1982, Sinise's career began to take off when he directed and starred in Steppenwolf's production of True West. In 1983, he earned an Obie Award for his direction, and a year later appeared with John Malkovich in the PBS' American Playhouse production of the play. Sinise received a Joseph Jefferson Award for his direction of Lyle Kessler's play Orphans in 1985. In 1988, Sinise directed Miles from Home, a film starring Richard Gere, about two brothers' fight against the foreclosure of the family farm.
Sinise earned the Regional Theatre Tony Award alongside the Steppenwolf Theatre Company in 1985. He has received a total of four Tony Award nominations, including nominations for his performances in The Grapes of Wrath (1988) and One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (2001).
In 1992, Sinise starred in the film adaptation of John Steinbeck's classic novel Of Mice and Men, which he also directed and produced. Sinise played George Milton alongside John Malkovich, who played Lennie. Subsequent roles include Lieutenant Dan Taylor in Forrest Gump (1994), for which Sinise was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. He has also appeared in the Stephen King miniseries The Stand (1994), Ron Howard's Apollo 13 (1995), Ransom (1996), Snake Eyes (1998), Frank Darabont's The Green Mile (1999), Reindeer Games (2000), Mission to Mars (2000), and Impostor (2002).
Sinise has collaborated with fellow actor Tom Hanks three times, in Forrest Gump, Apollo 13, and The Green Mile.  He narrated the audiobooks for John Steinbeck's Travels with Charley.
Sinise also portrayed real-life characters in several television films.  He portrayed Harry S. Truman in Truman (1995), a portrayal that won him a Golden Globe Award; and he played George Wallace in George Wallace (1997), for which he received a Primetime Emmy Award. Sinise reprised his role as Wallace in the television film Path to War (2002), about the Johnson administration's entry into the Vietnam War.
In late 2002, Sinise began appearing in Cadillac commercials, starting with the 2002–2003 Season's Best commercial. He was with the Break Through campaign from 2002 to 2006.
In 2004, Sinise began his first regular television series, in the crime drama CSI: NY, in which he plays Detective Mac Taylor. He was credited as a producer from season two onwards and wrote the storyline of an episode. Several episodes have allowed Sinise to demonstrate his musical prowess, including a season-two episode where Mac Taylor plays the bass guitar in a jazz club with musicians Kimo and Carol Williams and Danny Gottlieb, members of the Lt. Dan Band, which Sinise and Kimo Williams co-founded in 2003. The band is named for Sinise's character in Forrest Gump. The series ended in 2013.
Apart from his television and film work, Sinise has served as the host in the video for the Epcot ride Mission: SPACE at Walt Disney World, Orlando, Florida, and as a model for Baume & Mercier watches.
Sinise was the narrator for the Discovery Channel's miniseries When We Left Earth in 2008. Sinise is the executive producer—along with David Scantling—of the Iraq War documentary Brothers at War.  The film features an American military family and the experiences of three brothers: Jake Rademacher, Isaac Rademacher, and Joseph Rademacher.
In November 2009, Sinise narrated the highly acclaimed World War II in HD on the History Channel. Also in 2009, Sinise lent his voice talents in the Thomas Nelson audio Bible production known as The Word of Promise, playing the character of David. In 2010, he narrated the World War II documentary Missions That Changed the War on the Military Channel. In 2014, he narrated a Smithsonian Institution exhibit in the film Captain America: The Winter Soldier.
From 2016 to 2017, Sinise played Special Agent Jack Garrett in Criminal Minds: Beyond Borders.
On April 17, 2017, Sinise received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work in the television industry. The star is located at 6664 Hollywood Boulevard.
On October 30, 2017, Sinise was selected as Grand Marshal of the Pasadena Tournament of Roses Parade, which took place on January 1, 2018.
Sinise has been a regular celebrity narrator at Disney's Candlelight Processional, appearing at Disneyland in 2011 and at Disney World in 2013, 2015, 2018, and 2019.


== Humanitarian work ==
Sinise co-founded Operation Iraqi Children. Sinise said, "Iraq is in the news every day, and most of it is bad. But there are some positive stories. And how our soldiers are rebuilding schools and helping kids is one of them."
Sinise was awarded the Presidential Citizens Medal by President George W. Bush for work he did supporting the U.S. military and humanitarian work supporting Iraqi children. He narrated Army and Army Reserve Army Strong recruitment ads in late 2008.
Sinise is a supporter of various veterans' organizations, both personally and through the Lt. Dan Band. He frequently performs on USO tours at military bases around the world, and volunteered for the National Vietnam Veterans Arts Museum now called the National Veterans Art Museum. Since 2003, Gary Sinise has visited 174 military bases and 21 military hospitals around the world.
Sinise is also on the Advisory Council of Hope For The Warriors, a national nonprofit dedicated to provide a full cycle of nonmedical care to combat-wounded service members, their families, and families of the fallen from each military branch. Sinise narrates the audiobook of John Steinbeck's Of Mice and Men which was released on April 13, 2011. In December 2011, Sinise was the narrator at the Candelight Processional at Disneyland.
In August 2012, Sinise was honored at the United States Navy Memorial, by Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy (MCPON) Rick West, and was made an honorary U.S. Navy Chief Petty Officer for his efforts in helping veterans. On August 29, 2013, he was named an honorary Marine by the Commandant of the Marine Corps. In 2006, Sinise began co-hosting the National Memorial Day Concert on the Mall in Washington, D.C., with actor and Illinois native Joe Mantegna.
He serves as the national spokesperson for the American Veterans Disabled for Life Memorial and spends much of his time raising awareness for the memorial and other veterans' service organizations. In 2012, he was honored by the Joe Foss Institute for his dedication to veterans.
In 2013, he was awarded the third highest honor within the Department of the Army Civilian Awards, the Outstanding Civilian Service Award, for substantial contributions to the U.S. Army community through his work with the Gary Sinise Foundation. Each year the foundation raises over $30 million which it uses to benefit military veterans, including building smart homes for those who are disabled. He participated in Troopathon VI for 2013, as he has in the past, to help raise money for care packages for American troops.
He received the 2015 Sylvanus Thayer Award, awarded by the West Point Association of Graduates to a non-West Point graduate whose character, service, and achievements reflect the ideals prized by the U.S. Military Academy.
In 2019, a video went viral of Gary Sinise reacting to a video of active duty service men and women, veterans, first responders, their families, and Colin Powell, Tom Hanks, Robert De Niro, Ron Howard, Steve Buscemi, Jay Leno, Tim Allen, Rob Lowe, Judd Apatow and Robin Roberts giving thanks to Sinise for all his humanitarian work.
In 2020, the Location Managers Guild honored Sinise with its Humanitarian award at their annual awards ceremony in recognition of the work he does with the Gary Sinise Foundation. In accepting the award. Sinise read a quote from President Calvin Coolidge saying, "The nation which forgets its defenders will itself be forgotten".
On April 16, 2021, Sinise hosted the inauguration ceremony of the World War I memorial in Washington, D.C.


== Personal life ==

Sinise married actress Moira Harris in 1981. She was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2018 and as of 2024 she is cancer-free. They have three children.
His son, McCanna "Mac" Anthony Sinise, was diagnosed in 2018 with chordoma, a rare cancer of the spine. He died on January 5, 2024 and was laid to rest on January 23, 2024, in a Catholic service. Mac was a musician who had worked for his father's charitable foundation, and before his death, he had completed work on an album Resurrection & Revival.
Sinise is a practicing Catholic. He converted to the faith on December 24, 2010, following his wife, Moira, who was raised Catholic and re-converted in 2000.
In 2003, Sinise was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters by Amherst College. He was awarded an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts degree by California State University, Stanislaus in 2008.
Sinise is a devoted fan of the Chicago Cubs and the Chicago Bears. He is also a fan of the band Kansas.


== Politics ==
In 2004, Sinise founded Friends of Abe, a support and networking group for conservative members of Hollywood.
In May 2009, Nicolle Wallace, a former adviser to George W. Bush and John McCain, mentioned Sinise as a potential Republican presidential candidate in 2012. Sinise narrates the online virtual tour for the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and spoke at the centennial celebration of Ronald Reagan's birth at the library in February 2011.
In September 2012, Sinise donated to Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney.
Sinise's Republican-leaning views have been written into the character of Mac Taylor on CSI: NY. Taylor has a picture of Reagan displayed in his office and was once the subject of a joke by one of his colleagues about an eight-hour Reagan documentary he watched over and over again.
Despite being a lifelong supporter of the Republican Party, Sinise refused to endorse or vote for Donald Trump in the 2016 presidential election, or in the 2024 election and also criticized Trump after the then-candidate questioned McCain's status as a war hero because he was captured as a prisoner of war.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Theater ===


=== Video games ===


== Awards and honors ==

Over the years, Sinise has received numerous honors for his humanitarian work and his work on behalf of military veterans and families.


== Bibliography ==
Sinise, Gary; Brotherton, Marcus (2019). Grateful American: A Journey from Self to Service. Nashville: Thomas Nelson. ISBN 978-1-40020-812-8.


== References ==


== External links ==

Gary Sinise at IMDb
Gary Sinise at the Internet Broadway Database 
Gary Sinise at the Internet Off-Broadway Database (archived)