Hortensia Saga: Ao no Kishidan (Japanese: オルタンシア・サーガ -蒼の騎士団-, Hepburn: Orutanshia Sāga: Ao no Kishidan; lit. "Hortensia Saga: Blue Knights") was a Japanese free-to-play role-playing video game developed and published by f4Samurai and Sega. It was released in Japan in April 2015 for Android and iOS devices. The game ended service in May 2022. An anime television series adaptation produced by Liden Films aired from January to March 2021.


== Characters ==
Alfred Albert (アルフレッド・オーベル, Arufureddo Ōberu)
Voiced by: Yoshimasa Hosoya (Japanese); Chris Hackney (English)
The protagonist is the main player-controlled character of Hortensia Saga. He is named Alfred Albert in the anime series.
Marius Casterede (マリユス・カステレード, Mariyusu Kasuterēdo)
Voiced by: Yui Horie (Japanese); Laura Stahl (English)
A young boy who was rescued by Maurice after the rebellion that took his parents' lives. He has trained for years alongside Alfred and becomes his squire. Secretly, Marius is Princess Mariel D'Hortensia (マリエル・ド・オルタンシア, Marieru do Orutanshia), hiding under Maurice to keep her out of the sights of Camellia.
Maurice Baudelaire (モーリス・ボードレール, Mōrisu Bōdorēru)
Voiced by: Kenjiro Tsuda (Japanese); D. C. Douglas (English)
A Knight Templar of Hortensia who lost his right eye during the rebellion, but managed to escape the capital with Fernando's sword and a boy named Marius. He spends a few years training both Alfred and Marius to defend themselves.
Nonnoria Foly (ノンノリア・フォリー, Nonnoria Forī)
Voiced by: Reina Ueda (Japanese); Kayli Mills (English)
A maid serving the Albert household.
Qoo Morimoru (クー・モリモル, Kū Morimoru)
Voiced by: Aya Uchida (Japanese); Suzie Yeung (English)
A small winged talking mammal who ends all his sentences with "moru."
Deflotte Danois (デフロット・ダノワ, Defurotto Danowa)
Voiced by: Yuichiro Umehara (Japanese); Alejandro Saab (English)
A womanizing spearman with a small bounty on his head who fled his village at an early age, only to find it overrun by zombies when he returned years later. He joins Alfred's party after they help save what is left of his home from the Church.
Adelheid Olivier (アーデルハイド・オリヴィエ, Āderuhaido Orivie)
Voiced by: Yū Kobayashi (Japanese); Rebekah Thomas (English)
A Knight Templar of Hortensia who wields a spear in combat. The heir to the Olivier Dominion after her father died, she is forced to run a vassal state under the eyes of the Church, but secretly continues searching for the missing Princess Mariel.
Leon D. Olivier (レオン・D・オリヴィエ, Reon D Orivie)
Voiced by: Tetsuya Kakihara
The leader of the Olivier Dominion and Adelheid's father who died while protecting the King of Hortensia during Camellia's rebellion.
Fernando Albert (フェルナンド・オーベル, Ferunando Ōberu)
Voiced by: Takehito Koyasu
A Knight Templar of Hortensia who gave his life to drive out Duke Rugis from the castle during the rebellion. His sword was passed down to his son, Alfred.
Rugis F. Camellia (ルギス・F・カメリア, Rugisu F Kameria)
Voiced by: Kenji Nomura (Japanese); Patrick Seitz (English)
The Duke of Camellia who makes a pact with dark powers to rebel against Hortensia and take control for himself. He can transform into a giant werewolf.
Roy Bachelot (ロイ・バッシュロ, Roi Basshuro)
Voiced by: Takuya Eguchi (Japanese); Jonah Scott (English)
A master archer who serves under Rugis, he wields a custom-made bow that allows him to defend himself at close range as well as shoot down targets from afar.
Bernadette Albert (ベルナデッタ・オーベル, Berunadetta Ōberu)
Voiced by: Yuka Ōtsubo
Alexis Vall d'Hebron (アレクシ・バルデブロン, Arekushi Barudeburon)
Voiced by: Kazuma Horie (Japanese); Daman Mills (English)
Didier Viardot (ディディエ・ヴィアルドー, Didie Viarudō)
Voiced by: Shūichi Ikeda (Japanese); Kent Williams (English)
Palthouser Dreadnought (バルトハウザー・ドレッドノート, Barutohauzā Doreddonōto)
Voiced by: Takaya Hashi
Georg Dalmas (ゲオルグ・ダルマス, Georugu Darumasu)
Voiced by: Unshō Ishizuka (game), Atsuki Tani (anime)
A senior Knight Templar of Hortensia forced to work with the Church after the Pope uses Charlot to give the Church's own knights authority over the Knights Templar.
Beltran De Boske (ベルトラン・デ・ボスケ, Berutoran de Bosuke)
Voiced by: Takehito Koyasu
Saria/Elva (サリア/エルヴァ, Saria/Eruvua)
Voiced by: Rie Kugimiya
A pair of young Dayerehan twins who wield dark magic and can summon some monsters.
Charlot D'Hortensia (シャルロ・ド・オルタンシア, Sharuro do Orutanshia)
Voiced by: Miyuki Sawashiro
A young boy who was crowned King of Hortensia after his father died and his older sister, the Princess, went missing during the rebellion. Currently used as a puppet ruler under the Pope.
Marie (マリー, Marī)
Voiced by: Shizuka Itō
Jim McNeil (ジム・マクニール, Jimu Makunīru)
Voiced by: Toshiyuki Morikawa
Adel (アデル, Aderu)
Voiced by: Toshiyuki Morikawa
Gaston (ガストン, Gasuton)
Voiced by: Kōji Ishii
Lucan (ルーカン, Rūkan)
Voiced by: Takahiro Sakurai
Doctor Graff (ドクトル・グレフ, Dokutoru Gurefu)
Voiced by: Shigeru Chiba
Lacroix (ラクロワ, Rakurowa)
Voiced by: Kana Asumi


== Media ==


=== Manga ===
A manga adaptation illustrated by Pon Jea and Seiji was serialized in Media Factory's seinen manga magazine Monthly Comic Alive from March 27 to November 27, 2020.


==== Volumes ====


=== Anime ===
An anime television series adaptation by Liden Films was announced on December 28, 2019. The series was directed by Yasuto Nishikata and written by Rintarō Ikeda, with character designs by Takayuki Onoda and music by Zenta. It aired from January 7 to March 25, 2021. The opening theme is "LEADER" performed by MY FIRST STORY. Mafumafu performed the first ending theme "Night Dream and Daydream" (夜想と白昼夢, Yasō to Hakuchūmu) from Episodes 1–7 and 9–12, while Yui Horie performed the second ending theme "VEIL" for Episode 8 as her character Mariel D'Hortensia.
Funimation licensed the series and streamed it on its website in North America and the British Isles, in Europe through Wakanim, and in Australia and New Zealand through AnimeLab. On October 29, 2021, Funimation announced the series would receive an English dub, which premiered the following day. Following Sony's acquisition of Crunchyroll, the series was moved to Crunchyroll. In Southeast Asia, Muse Communication has licensed the series and streamed it on Bilibili.


==== Episodes ====


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (in Japanese)
Anime official website (in Japanese)
Hortensia Saga (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia