Ostap Korkuna (Ukrainian:Остап Коркуна; born 26 September 1987 in Lviv) is a Ukrainian American software engineer, inventor, entrepreneur, and humanitarian. He is a gold medalist of the ACM International Collegiate Programming Contest, as well as co-founder of the nonprofit organization Nova Ukraine that raised over a hundred million dollars for humanitarian aid to Ukraine.


== Education and career ==
Korkuna holds a master's degree in Informatics from Lviv National University in Ukraine. While at university, he took part in competitive programming contests. He was a member of the team representing Lviv National University at the 2008 International Collegiate Programming Contest World Finals. The team placed fourth overall and was awarded gold medals along with the other top four teams. As a solo competitor, he placed 13th in the 2009 Topcoder Open Algorithm Competition.
Korkuna's strong performance in programming contests attracted the attention of recruiters at Facebook, and he moved to California as one of the company's first Ukrainian employees. Until 2024, he worked as a director of engineering at People.ai.
Korkuna completed his Master of Science in Management at the Stanford Graduate School of Business, graduating on June 15, 2025.
Ostap Korkuna is the co-founder and CTO of NeoLens, a startup developed through Stanford University’s Hacking for Defense program. The company focuses on building an offline AI-powered troubleshooting assistant for frontline military mechanics, with initial deployments supporting Ukrainian troops in diagnosing and repairing vehicles.


=== Inventions ===
Ostap Korkuna, during his tenure at People.ai, was listed as an inventor on several patents focused on systems and methods for matching electronic activities to business record objects. His contributions include:

Developing feedback-based matching models that access electronic activities and select the most relevant business record objects, allowing for improved accuracy through feedback-configured policies.
Creating methods for extracting data from matched records and assigning corresponding labels to electronic activities, enhancing data categorization and automation.
Innovating approaches for identifying participants in electronic activities and associating those activities with related record objects using entity relationship policies, thereby improving the linkage between activities and business data.
These patents relate to the automation and intelligence of matching electronic communications (such as emails and calendar events) to CRM or business records, leveraging feedback and entity relationships to increase reliability and utility of business data.


== Non-profit leadership and advocacy ==
Korkuna co-founded Nova Ukraine in 2014 and served as its volunteer co-chair until 2024.


=== Street rallies and advocacy ===
In 2018 Korkuna led a rally in San Francisco to support Ukrainian sailors captured by Russia in the Kerch Strait incident. In February and March 2022, in the first weeks of Russian invasion of Ukraine, he led street rallies in San Francisco to raise awareness about the situation in Ukraine.
In Summer 2022, at a public discussion event at the Commonwealth Club of California, Korkuna outlined how Nova Ukraine helped Ukrainian refugees in Mexico and in the US with shelter, food, basic necessities, and communications, while advocating for additional aid.


=== Non-profit leadership ===
During the 2014 Revolution of Dignity, Korkuna helped organize the Ukrainian community in the San Francisco Bay area as a local branch of Euromaydan to show solidarity with Ukraine through street rallies. He co-founded Nova Ukraine in 2014, and has led the organization for over 8 years, contributing to fundraising, recruitment and media relations. Under Korkuna's leadership, Nova Ukraine raised funds for humanitarian aid for Ukraine and delivered over a hundred million dollars' worth of aid since 2022.


== Awards and distinctions ==
In 2023, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky recognized Korkuna's contributions as the co-founder and co-chair of Nova Ukraine with the Order of Merit 3rd class.
In August 2025, the  Focus magazine included Nova Ukraine among 100 "most impactful Ukrainians" as the #5 volunteer organization.


== References ==


== External links ==
Ostap Korkuna on Facebook
Nova Ukraine nonprofit