Stremio is a semi–open-source content aggregator. It centralizes streaming metadata and multiple sources for a better tracking and watching experience.


== Overview ==
Stremio is focussed on cross-platform streaming by aggregating information and sources into a single intuitive application that keeps track of watch history, in-progress shows/movies and content from multiple providers. Other features are available through the installation of third-party add-ons. Stremio displays information on movies and tv shows and where to watch them. Additionally, there is a dedicated section on the main page that contains live media and visual works in the public domain. Subtitles are generally available through OpenSubtitles. Stremio tracks when new episodes from a show are released and allows the user to catalogue their favorite shows and movies. Stremio code is archived as an ASAR file.
Stremio app is available for Windows, MacOS, Linux, Android, iOS and smart TVs, including Samsung and LG.


== History ==
Stremio had been under development since 2012. According to Ivo, Stremio co-founder, the app was created with the purpose of using torrents as a way to stream videos. Their first prototype was called Cinematic, based on libtorrent, python and NW.js and using Peerflix engine. The project evolved to be capable of streaming from other sources.
The app was officially released in 8 February 2015, after the deactivation of Popcorn Time.


== Controversies ==
There are several unofficial add-ons that allow users to illegally stream movies and tv shows. Several add-ons use torrents in hand with the built-in metadata fetching tools of Stremio to provide a comprehensive streaming platform for users. Users who watch content provided by these Stremio torrent add-ons are simultaneously uploading that content to other users. If not using a VPN, this will expose their IP addresses and can lead to legal liability in certain countries.
Stremio raised in popularity since 2020 and viralized on Twitter in 2024 as an alternative way of illegally streaming audiovisual works, due the increasing prices of streaming platforms.


== See also ==
Popcorn Time
Kodi (software)
Debrid


== References ==