The Social Reckoning is an upcoming American biographical drama film written and directed by Aaron Sorkin. It is a companion piece to The Social Network (2010) and is based on the events surrounding the 2021 Facebook leak by whistleblower Frances Haugen, which additionally inspired The Wall Street Journal's article series and eight-part podcast The Facebook Files (2021). The film will star Jeremy Strong as Mark Zuckerberg, alongside Jeremy Allen White, Mikey Madison, Bill Burr, Wunmi Mosaku, Billy Magnussen, Betty Gilpin, Gbenga Akinnagbe, Anna Lambe, Sierra Capri, Portia Doubleday and Tehmina Sunny.
Sorkin had previously expressed interest and willingness to write a sequel to The Social Network should it involve the film's director David Fincher on numerous occasions since its original release. A follow-up to the film entered development in June 2025 with Sorkin attached as both writer and director. Sorkin also produced alongside Todd Black, Peter Rice and Stuart M. Besser. Casting for the film's ensemble was also underway that same month. Principal photography began in October 2025 in Vancouver. 
The Social Reckoning is scheduled to be released on October 9, 2026, by Sony Pictures Releasing.


== Cast ==
Jeremy Strong as Mark Zuckerberg. The role was previously portrayed by Jesse Eisenberg in The Social Network.
Jeremy Allen White as Jeff Horwitz
Mikey Madison as Frances Haugen
Bill Burr
Wunmi Mosaku
Billy Magnussen
Betty Gilpin
Gbenga Akinnagbe
Anna Lambe
Aidan Laprete
Kelley Pereira
Nelson Franklin
Portia Doubleday
Patrick Fischler
Joey Brooks
Sierra Capri
Tehmina Sunny


== Production ==


=== Development ===
In January 2019, Aaron Sorkin, the screenwriter of the The Social Network (2010), revealed that producer Scott Rudin has suggested the development of a screenplay for a sequel, noting, "A lot of very interesting, dramatic stuff has happened since the movie ends." Sorkin also mentioned that there was indeed enough material to create a sequel. On July 18, 2019, Jesse Eisenberg, who starred as Mark Zuckerberg, expressed his interests in starring in the proposed sequel, stating that "Sorkin is a genius, and if he chooses to write about something, I'll obviously be interested". In October 2020, a decade after the film's release, Sorkin announced that he would only write the sequel's script if Fincher returned as director. In 2023, The Social Network's director David Fincher told The Guardian that he and Sorkin have discussed a sequel, but said "that's a can of worms." In April 2024, Sorkin said he had been working on the script for a new Facebook movie tied to the January 6 United States Capitol attack.
Announced with the title The Social Network Part II, the film was reported to have entered development in June 2025, with Sorkin attached as both writer and director, with the story focusing on the 2021 Facebook leak by whistleblower Frances Haugen as reported by Jeff Horwitz in The Facebook Files for The Wall Street Journal. Sorkin will produce the film alongside Todd Black and Stuart M. Besser, after collaborating on his last two films, The Trial of the Chicago 7 (2020) and Being the Ricardos (2022), as director. The film's title was changed to The Social Reckoning in September 2025.


=== Casting ===
Casting for the film's ensemble was underway by June 2025, with the film seen as a vehicle for many rising stars given the previous film's status as a breakthrough for both Eisenberg and Andrew Garfield, who respectively portrayed Zuckerberg and Eduardo Saverin. It remained unknown if Eisenberg would reprise the role. In July 2025, it was announced that Mikey Madison, Jeremy Allen White, and Jeremy Strong were being considered for roles in the film.
In September 2025, The Hollywood Reporter reported that Bill Burr joined the cast as an unknown character in the film, with Strong, Madison, and White confirmed for the cast, with Strong replacing Eisenberg. Eisenberg passed on reprising the role of Zuckerberg for the film, having felt, among other reasons, that he had outgrown it. The following day, Garfield confirmed he wouldn't reprise his role as Saverin in the film either, citing how the real-life Saverin is currently living in Singapore to explain his absence from the film's plot, but expressed his interest in the project. Additional castings including Wunmi Mosaku, Billy Magnussen, Betty Gilpin, Gbenga Akinnagbe, Tehmina Sunny and Portia Doubleday were announced throughout October.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography began in Vancouver on October 22, 2025, and will wrap on December 9, under the working title Goliath. Jeff Cronenweth serves as cinematographer for the film.


== Release ==
The Social Reckoning is scheduled to be released in the United States on October 9, 2026, by Sony Pictures Releasing.


== References ==


== External links ==
The Social Reckoning at IMDb