Typewise is a Swiss artificial intelligence company that develops an AI agent platform for enterprise customer service. Its first product was a virtual keyboard for Android and iOS devices. The keyboard features a self-developed hexagonal layout and a predictive typing engine suggesting the next word depending on context and multilingual language support. In January 2022, the company filed a patent for its technology which it claims outperforms that of Google's and Apple's. 
In December 2021, Typewise keyboard had been installed over 1.4 million times and in January 2022, the keyboard won a Consumer Electronics Show (CES) Innovation Award for the second year running.


== Products ==


=== AI agent platform ===
Typewise's main product is an AI agent platform for enterprise customer service. The platform uses AI agents to autonomously resolve customer requests across channels such as email, chat and messaging, and has been deployed in contact center environments, for example through partnerships with unified communications providers.


=== Earlier products ===
Typewise writing assistant is a browser-based predictive text tool designed to increase the speed and quality of written communication, specifically for customer support and sales teams. The company claims it can increase productivity by 2-3 times.

Typewise keyboard is a mobile application for iOS and Android smartphones that provides features for typing on a smartphone. The app offers two keyboard layouts, the traditional QWERTY keyboard and the self-invented hexagonal layout (“honeycomb layout”) which was developed especially for typing with two thumbs. 
The keyboard employs swipe gestures that replace keys like ⇧ Shift and ← Backspace to edit text. Deleting text is done with a swipe to the left. Deleted text can be restored with a swipe back to the right. Letters can be capitalized or lowercased by swiping up or down on their respective keys, and diacritics can be added to letters by pressing and holding the corresponding key.
To power text prediction for the keyboard, Typewise developed an artificial intelligence with the Swiss science institute ETH Zurich. Typewise's artificial intelligence is designed to run entirely on the user's device in light of privacy concerns related to transmitting potentially sensitive user typing data over the internet. The keyboard’s text prediction technology does not send any typing data to a cloud as it runs offline.
Typewise keyboard supports over 40 languages and allows typing in multiple languages simultaneously by means of an algorithmic language recognition. Typewise’s core technology draws on text prediction, which consists of auto-corrections and word-completion. The company collaborates with ETH Zurich's Data Analytics Lab, supported by Innosuisse (Switzerland's Innovation Agency) to further develop the technology.
Typewise also have released an API that enables developers to use Typewise's AI on third party platforms.


== History ==
Typewise was founded in May 2019 by David Eberle and Janis Berneker. Its head office is in Zürich, Switzerland.
In 2015, Eberle and Berneker initiated a Kickstarter Crowdfunding Campaign where they raised approx. USD 17,000. With those the founders launched an app prototype in 2016 under the name “WRIO Keyboard” on App Store and Play Store. In 2019, Typewise launched the app to the public. In July 2020, Typewise sought and received funding from angel investors as well as a Swiss research grant, totaling US$1.04 million, allowing for the continued development of the keyboard's artificial intelligence.
At that point, the app had amassed roughly 250,000 downloads and had approximately 65,000 active users. By November 2020, Typewise expanded its total financing to US$1.52 million, including the research grant.
In October 2021, Typewise raised another $2m via a crowdfund campaign on the platform Seedrs.
In 2022, Typewise was selected for the Y Combinator Summer 2022 batch, receiving the accelerator’s standard US$500,000 backing. During this period the company shifted its focus from a consumer keyboard app to business-to-business text prediction tools aimed at improving typing productivity in customer service and sales teams.


== Awards ==
European Customer Champion (EUROCC) 2024 – Typewise's AI writing solution was used in DPD (Schweiz) AG's project "Typewise@DPD – Produktivitätssteigerung durch KI", which was one of the three winning projects at the 2024 European Customer Champion awards, recognized for improving customer service efficiency by more than 25%.
CES Innovation Award 2022 – Honoree for Software & Mobile Apps
BOSA (Best of Swiss App Awards) 2020 – Gold for Functionality & Silver for Innovation
CES Innovation Award 2021 – Honoree for Software & Mobile Apps
Swiss AI Award – 2nd Place


== References ==


== External links ==
Typewise on Google Play
Typewise on App Store (iOS)
Typewise Website