On 14 September [O.S. 4 September] 1607, Irish earls Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone, and Rory O'Donnell, 1st Earl of Tyrconnell, permanently departed Rathmullan in Ireland for mainland Europe, accompanied by their extended families, retinue, followers and fellow nobility, numbering about 100 people. The earls were patriarchs of the two most powerful clans in Ulster—the O'Neill and O'Donnell clans—and their permanent exile is seen to symbolise the end of Gaelic Irish society. This event is known as the Flight of the Earls (Irish: Imeacht na nIarlaí).
Both earls fought against the English Crown in the Nine Years' War (1593–1603), which ended with their surrender. The newly crowned James VI and I granted the earls generous peace terms which allowed them to retain their lands and titles. Many courtiers were unsatisfied with the king's leniency, and hostility towards the earls from British officials gradually increased over time. The implementation of English law in Ireland led to financial difficulties for both earls as well as a major land rights dispute between Tyrone and his vassal Donnell Ballagh O'Cahan, which was weaponised by officials such as Arthur Chichester, John Davies, and George Montgomery.
The flight was seemingly a snap decision; its exact motivation is unclear and is the subject of debate. The earls may have been conspiring against the government, and their flight could have been an attempt to evade arrest or execution. The earls were bound for A Coruña, as Habsburg Spain had allied with the Irish confederacy during the war, but were turned away by Philip III for fear of violating the recently-signed Treaty of London. The refugees spent time in Leuven in the Spanish Netherlands, where many of the passengers left their young children to be educated at the Irish College of St Anthony. The earls arrived in Rome on 29 April 1608 and were granted small pensions by Pope Paul V. Their accommodation in Rome was paltry compared to their estates in Ireland. Tyrconnell died of a fever three months later. Tyrone repeatedly demonstrated his intent to return to Ireland and retake his lands, but he became ill and died in 1616 before doing so.
Most of the passengers on the flight never returned to Ireland. The flight was declared as treasonous by King James and the earls' titles were forfeited, which led to the acquisition of the earls' lands as part of the Plantation of Ulster.


== Background ==


=== Nine Years' War ===
From 1593, Ulster lords Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone, and Hugh Roe O'Donnell led a confederacy of Irish lords in resistance to the Tudor conquest of Ireland. The Nine Years' War was a major political threat to the Tudor government's control of Ireland, and cost Queen Elizabeth I £2,000,000 to suppress—eight times more than had been spent on all continental wars waged during her reign. Despite the confederacy's military assistance from Spain (which was then engaged in the Anglo-Spanish War against England), confederate forces were decimated at the Siege of Kinsale. Hugh Roe traveled to Spain to seek further support from King Philip III, leaving his younger brother Rory in control of his forces.Following the Irish defeat at Kinsale, the confederacy disintegrated as English forces travelled across Ulster destroying crops and livestock. The royal army's use of scorched earth tactics led to famine across 1602–1603, with conditions so extreme that the local population were reduced to cannibalism. The promised Spanish fleet was repeatedly delayed due to a lack of resources, despite Hugh Roe's petitioning. He died in Simancas of illness on 9 September [O.S. 30 August] 1602. Subsequently the Spanish government abandoned support for the confederacy and sought peace with England. Rory surrendered to Lord Deputy Charles Blount, 8th Baron Mountjoy, at Athlone on 14 December [O.S. 4 December]. Tyrone went into hiding for several months, but eventually surrendered by signing the Treaty of Mellifont on 9 April [O.S. 30 March] 1603, which ended the Nine Years' War.
Following Hugh Roe O'Donnell's death, his confessor Florence Conroy continued to pressure Philip III for send military resources. Conroy sailed from A Coruña in April 1603 with two ships carrying arms to Ireland, but he arrived after the Treaty of Mellifont had been signed. Conroy did not disembark and returned to Spain.


=== Implementation of English law in Ireland ===
In summer 1603, Tyrone and Rory travelled to London to submit to King James I, who had acceeded to the English throne mere days before Tyrone's surrender. Despite years of bloodshed fighting the royal army, the confederates received remarkably generous terms. James pardoned Tyrone and Rory and restored them to most of their lands. Rory was made 1st Earl of Tyrconnell. Many English courtiers were upset and complained at the mild treatment of the earls, and became intent on dismantling the earls' remaining power.Despite their generous peace terms, the confederates' defeat in the Nine Years' War had a profound effect on Gaelic culture. The Gaelic succession system of tanistry was replaced with primogeniture and Irish lords were forced to renounce their Gaelic titles. These legal changes, which essentially replaced the Gaelic legal system with English common law, led to a prominent land rights dispute between Tyrone and his principal sub-chief (and son-in-law) Donnell Ballagh O'Cahan.
Customarily in Gaelic society, powerful chiefs granted portions of their land to sub-chiefs (Irish: uirríthe) in return for black rents. The often-tense relations between these chiefs were exploited by the government to weaken the Gaelic nobility. O'Cahan faced near-famine conditions towards the end of the war; he surrendered to English commander Henry Docwra in July 1602, relinquishing a third of his territory to the Crown under the promise that he would retain the remaining two-thirds under English law. O'Cahan's surrender critically weakened Tyrone's position and created animosity between the two men. When Tyrone surrendered at Mellifont, he negotiated with Mountjoy to retain ownership of O'Cahan's territory, overruling Docwra's promise. O'Cahan was further frustrated when Tyrone imposed various levies and taxes on the land to rebuild his wealth. O'Cahan was forced to yield a third of his lands to Tyrone. Neither man was satisfied with their circumstances as all of the castles on the disputed land remained in government hands.


=== Hostility from British officials ===
It was initially easy for Tyrone to rebuild his estates due to the lacklustre government of the new Lord Deputy, George Carey. He used his new patent to claim absolute ownership over his earldom and reduce the landholdings of other O'Neill clansmen. Tyrone did not lose contact with Spain nor the hope that Anglo-Spanish conflict would renew. He wrote to Philip III in summer 1603, offering to take up arms for Spain if Anglo-Spanish peace negotiations failed. Despite these hopes, the Anglo-Spanish War ended in August 1604 with the signing of the Treaty of London. The Spanish government was hamstrung by bankruptcy and did not want to provoke conflict with England.
Many English politicians and soldiers, who had fought against Tyrone in the war, went to great lengths to convince authorities that Tyrone was untrustworthy and required adequate punishment for his continued treachery. Arthur Chichester, who became Lord Deputy in February 1605, had an aggressive attitude towards the Gaelic lords. He abolished the Gaelic feudal system, making sub-chiefs into freeholders with new legal rights. In October he banned Catholic clergy from Ireland and forced the population to attend Protestant church services. Additionally the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot in late 1605 led to an increase in the severity of anti-Catholic laws. Tyrone's marriage became strained over his diminishing social position, and in December 1605 he considered divorcing his wife Catherine. Chichester sent officer Toby Caulfeild to recruit Catherine as a double agent, but she dismissed this out of hand. Tyrone was protected to an extent by Mountjoy's influence over the Irish Privy Council, but this support was lost when Mountjoy died in April 1606.

Chichester began to work with John Davies, Attorney-General for Ireland, to accuse Tyrone of treason. Despite their attempts, no hard evidence could be found. Chichester arrested and held Cuchonnacht Maguire, Maguire clan chief and a staunch supporter of Tyrone, for questioning. Other officials harnessed O'Cahan's hostility to orchestrate Tyrone's undoing. George Montgomery, the new Protestant Bishop of Derry, encouraged O'Cahan to renew his lawsuit. Montgomery also encouraged O'Cahan to leave his wife (Tyrone's daughter Rose), noting that "the breach between [O'Cahan] and his landlord [Tyrone] will be the greater by means of [Tyrone's] daughter". In March 1607 O'Cahan repudiated his marriage (though he retained Rose's dowry, against Tyrone's will) and before the end of the year he remarried to another woman.
O'Cahan received a loan from the Earl of Londonderry to fund his case, and also had Davies acting as his counsel. In May 1607, the trial came before the Privy Council. Tyrone lost his temper, snatching a document from O'Cahan's hands and tearing it up in front of Chichester. The council decreed that two-thirds of the lands should remain in O'Cahan's possession. It became clear to Tyrone that the restoration of his earldom meant little, and in a letter to the king he requested new letters patent to the disputed lands. In mid-July, Tyrone was ordered to present himself in London at the beginning of Michaelmas term (late September) to have ownership of the remaining land settled by the king.


== Plot ==


=== Tyrconnell's plotting ===
The Earl of Tyrconnell was discontented with his new royal grant which did not include the lands of his sub-chief Cahir O'Doherty in Inishowen. Tyrconnell's struggle to transition from the role of a Gaelic warlord to an Irish peer led to financial difficulties. This made him bitter and led to his plotting against the government. On a trip to Maynooth in 1607, Tyrconnell spoke of a plot against the English government, involving Tyrone and Spain, during a conversation with Richard Nugent, Baron Delvin (later 1st Earl of Westmeath). By September 1607, Tyrconnell realised that his plotting was known to the government. In late May 1607, Maguire left Ireland for the Spanish Netherlands.


=== Allegations from Howth ===
In early summer 1607, Anglo-Irish statesman Baron Howth, having returned from the Low Countries, alerted Chichester and the 1st Earl of Salisbury to the existence of a treasonous Catholic league. Howth implicated Tyrconnell and Delvin in "a general revolt intended by many of the nobility and principal persons of this land, together with the cities and towns of the greatest strength; and that they will shake off the yoke of the English government, as they term it, and adhere to the Spaniard". Howth couldn't prove Tyrone's involvement, but was assured from his exchanges with insiders that Tyrone was a key figure in the league. Howth also claimed that Conroy, who had received funding from Philip III, was travelling to Ireland to notify the league of an impending Spanish expedition. Chichester was alarmed by this news but doubted the veracity of Howth's information. Salisbury appears not to have taken Howth's claims seriously; on 22 July 1607, Salisbury and the Privy Council wrote that it was "not worthy to draw on the King to any sudden action; because first it might alarm the Irish..." Chichester was told that he should had "rectified a little the strong discontent of the towns and others now boiling in their hearts... Their loyalty would then be confirmed and the less would be their jealousy if there were occasion to lay hold of any persons of rank".
By contrasting Howth's accusations with Tyrone's own account, it is apparent that Howth's claims were somewhat exaggerated. Tyrone's records confirm the existence of this Catholic league, which included many Irish elites, which planned to occupy certain strongholds in Ireland once Spain assistance arrived. Howth stated that Philip III had promised military resources to the league, but from surviving Hispano-Irish correspondence it is clear that Philip III had not been appealed to until after the Flight.


=== Irish reaction ===
Tyrone learnt that the government intended to imprison him, or possibly execute him, once he got to London. He probably received the news at the same time he was ordered to London, as Chichester noted "since [Tyrone] received His Majesty's letter for his repair thither, he did lose his former cheerfulness and grew often exceedingly pensive". Tyrone and Tyrconnell later declared in correspondence with Spain that this intelligence came from "intimate friends of theirs on the King's very Council", codenamed "el Cid", "Rodan" and "Malgesi". Of these three friends, only the identity of "el Cid"—Henry Howard, Earl of Northampton—is known.
Historians are undecided on whether this plot actually existed and if the government intended to arrest Tyrone. The exact cause of Tyrone's flight is a matter of controversy among historians, though he certainly believed that his arrest was imminent.
A group of confederate allies, including clan chief Cuconnacht Maguire, seaman John Rath, Tyrconnell's secretary Matthew Tully and nobleman Donagh O'Brien, sent a French vessel to Ulster to facilitate an escape. Tyrone was at Slane with Chichester when news of the vessel's arrival reached him. He seemed to have come to an immediate snap decision. Attorney-General Davies recollected that Tyrone left Slane in an unusually solemn manner, farewelling every servant and child in the house.
By 1607, O'Neill's allies the Maguires and the Earl of Tyrconnell were finding it hard to maintain their prestige on lower incomes. They planned to seek Spanish support before news of the Battle of Gibraltar arrived.


== Journey ==


=== Ireland ===

On 14 September [O.S. 4 September] 1607, the émigrés embarked at midday at Rathmullan, a village on Lough Swilly in County Donegal, bound for A Coruña in Spain. Tyrone was clearly agitated during the departure. Due to time constraints, he left his five-year-old son Conn Ruadh behind, to Catherine's distress. According to an English account, "[Catherine] being exceedingly weary slipped down from her horse and weeping said she could go no further." Tyrone responded by threatening her with his sword "if she did not pass on with him and put on a more cheerful countenance". The ship was an 80-ton French warship.The earls were accompanied by ninety followers, many of them Ulster noblemen, and some members of their families. Several left their wives behind, hoping either to return or retrieve them later. The late Tomás Ó Fiaich, Archbishop of Armagh, gave a lecture at Rathmullan in September 1988 and recounted that the Earl of Tyrone allegedly "had a gold cross which contained a relic of the True Cross, and this he trailed in the water behind the ship, and according to O'Ciainain, it gave some relief from the storm" during the crossing to Quillebeuf-sur-Seine in Normandy, France. They finally reached the Continent on 4 October 1607. This supposed relic of the True Cross was probably a minor relic taken from that kept at Holy Cross Abbey, which they had previously visited en route to Kinsale in 1601.


=== France ===
Their destination was Spain, but they disembarked in France, specifically Quillebeuf-sur-Seine. The ship was driven by storms and contrary winds into port at Quillebeuf in Normandy. Henry IV of France refused English demands to hand over the émigrés and—though denying them from proceeding to Spain—permitted them passage to the Spanish Netherlands. 


=== Spanish Netherlands ===
Despite the earls' petitioning, Philip III would not allow the émigrés to enter Spain for fear of violating the 1604 Anglo-Spanish peace treaty. Spain was on the verge of bankruptcy and could not afford another war with England. In mid-December, the émigrés received news that Archduke Albert VII wanted them to leave his states. On 18 February [28 February N.S.] 1608
, Tyrone and his companions (now reduced to thirty-two people on horseback plus the women in a coach) left Leuven to travel southwards. The nobles left their younger children behind in Leuven under the care of Irish Franciscans at St Anthony's College.


=== Rome ===
On 19 April [29 April N.S.]
, Tyrone and Tyrconnell were welcomed into Rome by a large procession of cardinals. The two earls met Pope Paul V the next day.
Tadhg Ó Cianáin's diary is important as the only continuous and contemporaneous account of the Flight. Its original title, Turas na dTaoiseach nUltach as Éirinn – the departure of the Chiefs of Ulster from Ireland – has been changed since the creation of the more dramatic phrase "Flight of the Earls" to the latter's modern literal translation, Imeacht na nIarlaí; and, according to Professor Ó Muraíle, turas can also mean a religious pilgrimage.


== Attainders ==

King James issued "A Proclamation touching the Earles of Tyrone and Tyrconnell" on 15 November 1607, describing their action as treasonous, and therefore preparing the ground for the eventual forfeiture of their lands and titles.
Their titles were attainted on 28 October 1614, although they continued to be recognized on the Continent. The attainders were not considered legitimate in continental Catholic countries of the day. Even within the context of English and colonial Irish rule, the attainder came about six years after Rory, 1st Earl of Tyrconnell, had already died. As accused, for him to have been properly tried, he should have been tried by his peers in the Peerage of Ireland, under the presiding authority of the Lord High Steward of Ireland.  However, he was already dead, unable to stand in his own defense, and his title already inherited by his son Hugh "Albert" O'Donnell; therefore in order to attain the title, the trial would have to have been of Hugh "Albert", who had in fact committed no crime. The 6-year delay in hearing the attainders was unavoidable, as his peers in the Irish House of Lords next sat in 1613, and dealt with the matter in the usual manner.
The attainder was however considered a travesty of justice by his supporters, and was considered null and void by many on the Continent. The succession of the Earl of Tyrconnell's son, Hugh Albert O'Donnell, as 2nd Earl of Tyrconnell (1st creation) was therefore recognized as valid in the Spanish Empire, and he was given the same status under a new Spanish title Conde de Tirconnel.
Under the Common law, the title granted by King James and accepted by the earl had potentially lapsed as soon as the Earl embarked on the ship without his king's permission to leave Ireland, and when it lapsed it could not then pass down to his descendants without some special waiver. Assuming that Hugh Albert was being punished for a crime he did not commit, and was not being given a hearing, misses the whole point of the law of attainder. Hugh Albert was never issued a Writ of Summons to sit in the Irish House of Lords as his father's heir. Hugh Albert also never came to Dublin in 1614 to argue his case for a waiver, so far as is known, and never accepted James I as his king. Until he did so, his title and his claim to nobility were considered to be "in abeyance".
These attainders had a much greater impact on the people of Ulster. The 1603 peace arrangement with the three lords was ended, as they had broken its conditions by leaving the kingdom without permission, and their remaining freehold lands were confiscated. Chichester proposed a new plantation of settlers from England, Wales and Scotland, sponsored in part by the City of London merchants, which became known as the Plantation of Ulster. This had an enormous negative impact on the lower class Gaelic-culture inhabitants of Ulster.


== Change in Spanish policy ==
In the papal bull Ilius of 1555, the Pope had conferred the title King of Ireland on King Philip II of Spain when he was married to Queen Mary. Philip II made no claim to the kingship of Ireland after Mary's death in 1558. He engaged in a lengthy war from 1585 with her sister Elizabeth I, and he and his successor Philip III supported the Irish Catholic rebels by sending the 4th Spanish Armada to Ireland in 1601 which ended in defeat at Kinsale. He had been offered the kingship in 1595 by O'Neill and his allies but turned it down. Given this lengthy support, it was reasonable for O'Donnell and O'Neill to imagine that they might solicit help from Philip III, but Spanish policy was to maintain the 1604 Treaty with England, and its European fleet had been weakened from several conflicts, including the Battle of Gibraltar by the Dutch over four months earlier.
Therefore, by mid-1607 Spain had neither the desire nor the means to assist an Irish rebellion. While the Flight is often described as a first step in arranging a new war, this must be seen as an emotional and false conclusion, as there were no plans or proposals at all from the Spanish side to support the earls. Spanish policy in the 1590s had been to help the Irish warlords as a nuisance against England, but they had been defeated by 1603. It could not be in any way in the interest of Spain to assist their unsuccessful former allies in 1607.


== Historiography ==


=== The Earls' intention ===
The event was first named as a "flight" in an 1868 book by Reverend Charles Patrick Meehan. In Irish, the neutral term Imeacht is usually used i.e. the Departure of the Earls. The term 'Flight' is translated 'Teitheadh na nIarlaí'.
Some historians, particularly Micheline Kerney Walsh, have criticised the name "Flight". Kerney Walsh argued that the Flight was a tactical retreat and not a spontaneous escape from authorities. Historians disagree to what extent the earls wanted to start a war with Spanish help to re-establish their positions, or whether they accepted exile as the best way of coping with their recent loss of status since the Treaty of Mellifont in 1603. Meehan argued that the earls' tenants wanted a new war: "Withal, the people of Ulster were full of hope that O'Neill would return with forces to evict the evictors, but the farther they advanced into this agreeable perspective, the more rapidly did its charms disappear."
In 1895, Richard Bagwell stated that "there can be no doubt that [Tyrconnell] had been in correspondence with Spain, but it must remain uncertain whether there was any conspiracy". In 1916, historian Paul Walsh wrote that "there is no evidence of conspiracy on the part of [O'Neill] or [Maguire]." In 1996, Murray Smith stated that O'Neill was not innocent of plotting. In 2007, John McGurk noted that "historians have been unable to agree on whether or not there was a plot in 1607" and "the historical jury is still out" on whether there was a government plot against O'Neill's life.


=== Symbolism ===
Their departure was the end of the old Gaelic order, in that the earls were descended from Gaelic clan dynasties that had ruled their parts of Ulster for centuries. The Flight of the Earls was a watershed event in Irish history, as the ancient Gaelic aristocracy of Ulster went into permanent exile. Despite their attachment to and importance in the Gaelic system, the Earls' ancestors had accepted their Earldoms from the English-run Kingdom of Ireland in the 1540s, under the policy of surrender and regrant (under this policy, Anglo-Irish and Gaelic Irish rulers were to surrender themselves and their lands to Henry VIII, and he would grant their land back to them along with an English title). Some historians argue that their flight was forced upon them by the fallout from the Tudor conquest of Ireland, while others that it was an enormous strategic mistake that cleared the way for the Plantation of Ulster.
From 1616, a number of bards outside Ulster had a poetic debate in the "Contention of the bards" and one of the arguments celebrated King James's Gaelic-Irish Milesian ancestry through Malcolm III of Scotland. So it is debatable whether the Gaelic order had ended or was evolving.


== Commemoration of 400th anniversary ==

In 2007, the 400th anniversary of the Flight was commemorated throughout County Donegal, including a regatta of tall ships, fireworks, lectures, and conferences.
On 14 September 2007, President of Ireland Mary McAleese unveiled a statue by John Behan at Rathmullan. The bronze statue depicts three men walking a gangplank, representing the plight of the refugees.
There is a permanent exhibition dedicated to the Flight of the Earls and the subsequent plantation in Draperstown in Northern Ireland and at the "Flight of the Earls Centre" in the Martello tower at Rathmullan.

The Cardinal Tomás Ó Fiaich Memorial Library and Archive marked the anniversary with an exhibition and outreach programme supported by the Heritage Lottery Fund. Commemorative postage stamps were issued by the Irish post office, featuring illustrations of Tyrone and Tyrconnell by Seán Ó'Brógáin.In 2008 there were also celebrations to mark the 400th anniversary of the arrival of the Earls in Rome, with a celebratory performance by the Cross Border Orchestra of Ireland in Sant'Ignazio Church in Rome. The flight was famously depicted by Thomas Ryan in his 1958 painting The Departure of O'Neill out of Ireland.
Across 2007 and 2008, Denis Conway starred in and organised a production of Brian Friel's 1989 play Making History, which follows Tyrone in Rome reckoning with his legacy. The production was toured along the route of the Flight of the Earls, as well as at various sites in Ireland associated with Tyrone and Hugh Roe O'Donnell. Similarly to the Flight, the tour concluded in Rome.
In January and February 2007, BBC Northern Ireland broadcast a documentary on the Flight.


== List of émigrés ==
Tadhg Ó Cianáin kept a record of the émigrés who participated in the flight. In 1972, Tomás Ó Fiaich and Pádraig de Barra published Imeacht na nIarlaí, which expanded the list based on extensive research. Not all of these individuals made the complete journey from Rathmullan to Rome; some left or joined midway through the journey.


=== Other refugees ===


=== Additional staff ===
In his account, Ó Cianáin recorded "2 lackies of [Tyrone]", "4 servants of [Tyrconnell]", "3 lackies of [Tyrconnell]" and "3 waiting women".


=== Nobility left behind in Ireland ===
Bridget FitzGerald, Tyrconnell's wife
Iníon Dubh, Tyrconnell's mother
Mary O'Donnell, Tyrconnell's sister
Niall Garve O'Donnell, Tyrconnell's cousin and brother-in-law
Hugh Boye O'Donnell, Niall Garve's brother
Hugh McHugh Dubh O'Donnell, senior O'Donnell nobleman
Cormac MacBaron O'Neill, Tyrone's brother. By the end of the war, Cormac and Tyrone's relationship had become frayed. He was later imprisoned in the Tower of London.
Margaret O'Donnell, Tyrconnell's sister and Cormac's wife. She later arrived in Flanders in 1622.
Conn Ruadh O'Neill, Tyrone's son


== In popular culture ==
Ethna Carbery's poem Princes of the North is addressed to Tyrone and laments the Flight.


== See also ==
Tudor conquest of Ireland
Contention of the bards
O'Cahan
Tadhg Ó Cianáin
"The Hunting of the Earl of Rone"
Regiment of Hibernia


== Notes and references ==


=== Notes ===


=== Citations ===


=== Sources ===


==== After 1960 ====


==== Pre-1960 ====
Bagwell, Richard (1895). "O'Donnell, Rory" . In Lee, Sidney (ed.). Dictionary of National Biography. Vol. 41. London: Smith, Elder & Co. pp. 444–447.
Burke, Sir Bernard (1866). A Genealogical History of the Dormant: Abeyant, Forfeited, and Extinct Peerages of the British Empire. Harrison.
Cokayne, George Edward (1896). Complete Peerage of England, Scotland, Ireland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom, Extant, Extinct, or Dormant. Vol. VII (1st ed.). London: George Bell and Sons. OCLC 1180891114.
Dunlop, Robert (1895). "O'Donnell, Niall Garv" . In Lee, Sidney (ed.). Dictionary of National Biography. Vol. 41. London: Smith, Elder & Co. pp. 443–444.
Jennings, Brendan (1941). "The Career of Hugh, Son of Rory O Donnell, Earl of Tirconnel, in the Low Countries, 1607-1642". Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review. 30 (118): 219–234. ISSN 0039-3495. JSTOR 30097953.
McNeill, Ronald John (1911). "O'Donnell" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 20 (11th ed.). pp. 6–8.
Meehan, Charles Patrick (1868). The fate and fortunes of Hugh O'Neill, earl of Tyrone, and Rory O'Donel, earl of Tyrconnel; their flight from Ireland, their vicissitudes abroad, and their death in exile. University of California Libraries. Dublin, J. Duffy.
Meehan, Helen (2006). "The Early 17th Century and Rory O'Donnell". Donegal Annual. 58: 45–66.
Ó Cianáin, Tadhg (1916) [1608]. Walsh, Paul (ed.). The Flight of the Earls. Translated by Walsh, Paul. Boston College Libraries. Dublin: M.H. Gill & Son.
O'Clery, Lughaidh; O'Clery, Cucogry; Murphy, Denis (1895). Beatha Aodha Ruaidh ui Dhomhnaill. The life of Hugh Roe O'Donnell, prince of Tirconnell (1586-1602). Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2013. Dublin: Fallon & Co.
O'Donnell, Eunan (2006). "Reflection on the Flight of the Earls". Donegal Annual. 58: 31–44.
Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland (1867). "PROCEEDINGS AND PAPERS". Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland. 5: 459.
Walsh, Paul (1929). "The Book of O'Donnell's Daughter". The Irish Ecclesiastical Record. XXXIII. Dublin: 561–575.
Walsh, Paul, ed. (1930). The Will and Family of Hugh O'Neill, Earl of Tyrone [with an Appendix of Genealogies] (PDF). Dublin: Sign of the Three Candles. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 May 2024.
Walsh, Micheline (April 1957). The O'Neills in Spain (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 July 2024.


== Further reading ==
Concannon, Helena (1916). "The Flight of the Earls". Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review. 5 (18): 165–178. ISSN 0039-3495. JSTOR 25700985.
Curley, Walter J. P. (2004). Vanishing Kingdoms: The Irish Chiefs and Their Families. Lilliput Press. ISBN 978-1-84351-055-0. (Chapter on O'Donnell of Tyrconnell, p. 59)
FitzPatrick, Elizabeth (2017). "The Exilic Burial Place of a Gaelic Irish Community at San Pietro in Montorio, Rome". Papers of the British School at Rome. 85: 205–239. doi:10.1017/S006824621700006X. hdl:10379/7088. ISSN 0068-2462. JSTOR 26578329.
McCavitt, John (1994). "The Flight of the Earls, 1607". Irish Historical Studies. 29 (114): 159–173. doi:10.1017/S002112140001155X. ISSN 0021-1214. JSTOR 30006740.
McCavitt, John (2007). The Flight of the Earls: an illustrated history. Internet Archive. April Sky Design. ISBN 978-0-9555091-3-1.
McConnel, James (2011). "Remembering the 1605 Gunpowder Plot in Ireland, 1605—1920". Journal of British Studies. 50 (4): 863–891. ISSN 0021-9371.
McEvoy, James (2007). "The Sojourn of the Ulster Earls at Louvain (November 1607 until February 1608): Movement, Meetings and Partings". Seanchas Ardmhacha: Journal of the Armagh Diocesan Historical Society. 21/22: 1–38. ISSN 0488-0196. JSTOR 29742835.
Morgan, Hiram (2006). "Teaching the Armada: An Introduction to the Anglo-Spanish War, 1585-1604". History Ireland. 14 (5): 37–43. ISSN 0791-8224. JSTOR 27725518.
O'Donnell, Francis Martin (2018b). The O'Donnells of Tyrconnell: A Hidden Legacy. Academica Press. ISBN 978-1-68053-474-0.
O'Grady, Standish (1897). The flight of the eagle. London: Lawrence and Bullen, Ltd.
Vicissitudes of Families, by Sir Bernard Burke, Ulster King of Arms, published by Longman, Green, Longman and Roberts, Paternoster Row, London, 1861. (Chapter on O'Donnells, pp. 125–148).
A View of the Legal Institutions, Honorary Hereditary Offices, and Feudal Baronies established in Ireland, by William Lynch, Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, published by Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown, and Green, Paternoster Row, London, 1830 (O'Donnell: p. 190, remainder to Earl's patent).
Walsh, Micheline (1975). "O Neills in Exile". Seanchas Ardmhacha: Journal of the Armagh Diocesan Historical Society. 8 (1): 55–68. doi:10.2307/29740859. ISSN 0488-0196. JSTOR 29740859.


== External links ==

Earls Heritage Centre, Rathmullan, County Donegal
Wild Geese Heritage Museum and Library
Mural depicting Flight of the Earls, Belfast
Yearlong Commemoration of Flight of the Earls  (1607–2007) 2007 – Donegal County Council/County Development Board
The Flight Of The Earls Dr John McCavitt FRHistS
Information on the Flight of the Earls
BBC History article
The National Library of Ireland's current exhibition, Strangers to Citizens: the Irish in Europe, 1600–1800