A khanate ( KHAHN-ayt, -⁠ət) or khaganate was a polity ruled by a khan, khagan, khatun, or khanum. Khanates were typically nomadic Mongolic and Turkic societies located on the Eurasian Steppe, and politically equivalent in status to kinship-based chiefdoms and feudal monarchies. Khanates and khaganates were organised tribally, where leaders gained power on the support and loyalty of their warrior subjects, gaining tribute from subordinates as realm funding. In comparison to a khanate, a khaganate, the realm of a khagan, was a large nomadic state maintaining subjugation over numerous smaller khanates. The title of khagan, translating as "Khan of the Khans", roughly corresponds in status to that of an emperor.


== Mongol khanates ==

Mongol Empire (1206–1368) was the largest steppe nomadic Khaganate as well as second largest empire and the largest contiguous empire in history. After Genghis Khan established appanages for his family in the Mongol Empire during his rule (1206–1227), his sons, daughters, and grandsons inherited separate sections of the empire. The Mongolian khanates that emerged from those appanages are listed below.
Chagatai Khanate (1226–1347), In 1226, the second son of Genghis Khan, Chagatai Khan established the Chagatai Khanate. At its height in the late 13th century, the khanate extended from the Amu Darya south of the Aral Sea to the Altai Mountains in the border of modern-day Mongolia and China, roughly corresponding to the defunct Qara Khitai Empire. Initially the rulers of the Chagatai Khanate recognized the supremacy of the Great Khan, but by the reign of Kublai Khan, Ghiyas-ud-din Baraq no longer obeyed the emperor's orders. By 1347 the khanate had split into the Moghulistan and West Chagatai Khanate.
Moghul Khanate
Yarkent Khanate
Turpan Khanate
Il-Khanate (1252–1335), In 1256, Il-Khanate was established by the grandson of Genghis Khan, Hulagu Khan. Its core territory lies in what is now part of the countries of Iran, Azerbaijan, and Turkey. At its greatest extent, the Ilkhanate also included parts of modern Iraq, Syria, Armenia, Georgia, Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Pakistan, part of modern Dagestan, and part of modern Tajikistan. Later Ilkhanate rulers, beginning with Ghazan in 1295, converted to Islam. In the 1330s, the Ilkhanate was ravaged by the Black Death. Its last khan Abu Sa'id died in 1335, after which the khanate disintegrated. The Ilkhanid rulers, although of non-Iranian origin, tried to advertise their authority by tying themselves to the Iranian past, and they recruited historians in order to present the Mongols as heirs to the Sasanians (224–651 AD) of pre-Islamic Iran.
Golden Horde 
Blue Horde
Great Horde
Astrakhan Khanate
Crimean Khanate
Khanate of Kazan
White Horde
Nogai Horde
Kazakh Khanate
Khanate of Bukhara
Khanate of Khiva
Khanate of Sibir
Yuan dynasty
Northern Yuan dynasty 
Bogd Khanate (1911–1924), under rule of the Bogd Khan, the last Mongol khagan
Dzungar Khanate, formed in 1634, covering Xinjiang region of China, Kyrgyzstan, eastern Kazakhstan and western Mongolia; 2 December 1717 – 1720, also styled Protector of Tibet; 1755 tributary to the Qing dynasty, 1758 annexed by Qing dynasty
Kalmyk Khanate, established c.1630 by the Torghut branch of the Mongol Oirats, settled along the lower Volga River (in modern Russia and Kazakhstan), 1630-1771
Kara Del
Keraite Khanate
Khamag Mongol Khanate
Khoshut Khanate
Khotgoid Khanate
Mergid Khanate
Naiman Khanate
Tatar Khanate
Kumul Khanate – a vassal state to Qing dynasty and Republic of China, abolished in 1930


== Indefinite origin ==

Avar Khaganate
Xiongnu, mentioned in Chinese sources, were possibly of Proto-Turkic, Turkic, Mongolic or else Iranic origin (disputed) and are proposed as the possible ancestors of the Huns (whose language remains unclassified).
Xueyantuo, mentioned in Chinese sources, were a Tiele tribe, related to the earlier Dingling people, who emerged after the disintegration of the Xiongnu confederacy (they were at one point vassals of the Göktürks, later aligning with the Tang dynasty against the Eastern Göktürks).


== Turkic khanates ==


=== Early and Late Medieval Turkic khaganates and khanates ===

First Turkic Khaganate
Eastern Turkic Khaganate
Western Turkic Khaganate
Second Turkic Khaganate
Uyghur Khaganate
Yenisei Kyrgyz Khaganate
Khazar Khaganate
Turgesh Khaganate

Cumania
Pechenegs

Old Great Bulgaria
Volga Bulgaria
First Bulgarian Empire, which started as a Turkic state, also known as Danube Bulgaria (in contrast to Volga Bulgaria, as both were established by members of the same Bulgar Turkic Dulo clan), but later became fully Slavicized and a Tsardom.
Golden Horde
Khanate of Kazan
Crimean Khanate


=== Central Asian Turkic khanates ===
Kara-Khanid Khanate
Kimek Khanate
Keraite Khanate
Naiman Khanate
Tatar Khanate
Merkit Khanate
Nogai Khanate
Astrakhan Khanate
Besh Tau El
Khanate of Bukhara
Khanate of Khiva
Kyrgyz Khaganate
Kara-Kyrgyz Khanate
Karluk Khanate
Khanate of Kashgaria – Kashgaria was founded in 1514 as part of Chagatai Khanate; in the 17th century it was divided into several minor khanates without importance, with real power going to the so-called Khwaja, Arabic Islamic religious leaders. It became the Yarkent Khanate which was annexed by the Dzungar Khanate in the Dzungar conquest of Altishahr in 1680.
Kazakh Khanate
Senior zhuz
Middle zhuz
Junior zhuz
Bukey Horde, Bokei or Buqei; also known as the Inner or Interior Horde –  This state founded in 1801 by Sultan Bukey under Russian suzerainty, and restyled as  the khanate of the Inner Horde in 1812. 5,000–7,500 families of Kazakhs from the Younger Kazakh Zhuz tribe settled between the Volga and Yaik (Ural) rivers. In 1845 the post of khan was abolished, and Russia took over the region.
Kokand Khanate
Kumul Khanate – a vassal state to Qing dynasty and Republic of China, abolished in 1930
Kunduz Khanate
Maimana Khanate
Oghuz Yabgu State
Qasim Khanate (hence modern Kasimov) – named after its founder, a vassal of Moscow and Russia
Khanate of Sibir – source of the name Siberia, as the first significant conquest during Russia's great eastern expansion across the Urals
The Khanate of Tuva near Outer Mongolia
Uzbek Khanate
Yarkent Khanate
Turpan Khanate


== Khanates of Azerbaijan ==

Ardabil Khanate
Karadagh khanate
Khalkhal Khanate
Maku Khanate
Maragheh Khanate
Sarab Khanate
Tabriz Khanate
Urmia Khanate


== Khanates of the Caucasus ==

 Khundzakh Khanate
Baku Khanate
Derbent Khanate
Erivan Khanate
Ganja Khanate
Gazikumukh Khanate
Javad Khanate
Karabakh Khanate
Khoy Khanate
Kura Khanate
Marand Khanate
Mehtuli Khanate
Nakhchivan Khanate
Quba Khanate
Shaki Khanate
Shamakhy Khanate
Shirvan Khanate
Talysh Khanate


== Other khanates ==
Nishapur Khanate
Rouran Khaganate
Later Jin dynasty – Later evolved into the Qing dynasty
Khanate of Kalat – Brahui/Baloch Khanate
Khazar Khaganate – Turkic nomads who later converted to Rabbinic Judaism


== See also ==
Rus Khaganate (not an actual Khanate but so named retroactively)
Afsharid dynasty
Beg Khan
Orda (organization)
Safavid dynasty
Timurid dynasty


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Khanates at Wikimedia Commons