In the infamous 2003 Kiliroor sex scandal, a teenaged girl named Shari S. Nair, hailing from Kiliroor, Kottayam, Kerala, India was sexually abused by reportedly being promised roles in TV serials. She was taken to many places in and around Kerala and was allegedly exploited sexually by "influential persons". Shari S Nair later died after she gave birth to a daughter who is now being raised by her parents.


== Case details ==
According to official sources, the request to the Centre was based on a suggestion by Kerala Police DGP P K Hormis Tharakan that the probe be handed over to CBI in view of the political nature of the case and the reported involvement of prominent persons.
Six persons, including the key accused Latha Nair who allegedly took the girl to many places, had already been arrested in the case, now being probed by a special police team.
Kerala government has recommended to the Centre to order a CBI inquiry into the scandal. The CBI filed chargesheet against nine persons in the sensational case before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ernakulam. The five accused are plead guiltily for rape of Shari Nair 


== Timeline ==
August 2003 - Kochumon alias Binu introduces Shari S. Nair, the victim to Latha Nair, she was gang raped following this.
August 15, 2004 - The victim delivered a baby girl in Government Medical College, Kottayam.
November 13, 2004 - The victim succumbed to death following medical complications.
December 10, 2008 - In response to a Public interest litigation, Judicial Magistrate of First Class- 3, Thiruvananthapuram directs Kerala Police to take case against Health Minister P. K. Sreemathy, CM's secretaries S. Rajendran and K. N. Balagopal, Latha Nair and sons of two ministers for conspiring to suppress certain sensitive information pertaining to the case in Chief minister's office.
February 8, 2012 - The five accused in the case namely Praveen, Manoj, Latha Nair, Kochumon and Prasanth sentenced for ten years rigorous imprisonment by Central Bureau of Investigation special court, Thiruvananthapuram.


== See also ==
V. S. Achuthanandan
P. K. Sreemathy


== References ==