This is a list of fictional monarchs – characters who appear in fiction as the monarchs (kings, queens, emperors, empresses, etc.) of real-life countries. They are listed by country, then according to the production or story in which they appeared.


== A ==


=== Albania ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Sophie I, the first female ruler in Pax Britannica.


=== Australia ===
Queen of Oz

Princess Georgiana of the fictional British royal family, played by Catherine Tate, becomes the monarch after her mother unexpectedly abdicates the Australian throne in favour of her scandalous daughter, hoping to send her as far away from London as possible and make her someone else's problem. The series also features her brother Prince Frederick, the heir apparent to the British throne.


=== Austria-Hungary ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Otto I
CharIes I's son and successor in Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg.
The Illusionist

Crown Prince Leopold is the powerful and influential heir to the throne of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in the 2006 film The Illusionist, although his father, the Emperor, is the actual reigning monarch.
A Scandal in Bohemia by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle

Wilhelm Gottsreich Sigismond von Ormstein – The Grand Duke of Cassel-Felstein and the hereditary King of Bohemia, he approaches Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson about the retrieval of letters and photographs confirming a liaison with Irene Adler in order to secure his engagement to Clotilde Lothma Von Saxe-Meiningen, a young Scandinavian princess. (The story fictionally assumes that Bohemia was ruled by its own Kings, rather than the actual situation of its being part of the domains of the Austro-Hungarian Emperor). There is also mentioned a "King of Scandinavia", a title which never existed in reality as the Scandinavian countries never united into a single realm, though Sweden and Norway were in personal union when the story was written.


== B ==


=== Brazil ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Pedro III, the emperor of Brazil in Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, if the monarchy is restored.
Time for the Stars by Robert A. Heinlein

Emperor Dom Pedro III greets the protagonists as they return to Earth after a centuries-long galactic voyage, presenting them with a medal on behalf of the World Government.
The Peshawar Lancers by S. M. Stirling

In the novel, Dom Pedro is mentioned as ruler of the Dominion of Braganza, the shadowy post-Fall successor to the Empire of Brazil ruled by a caudillo of the month.
Books by Harry Turtledove

Dom Pedro IV: In the Southern Victory series, he is the Emperor of Brazil during the First Great War, leading the country into war on the side of Central Powers, cutting off supply lines between the Allied countries of Argentina and Britain and hastening the end of the war. Pedro IV's lineage and the status of slavery in Brazil are not addressed, whilst the continued existence of the Brazilian Empire may be an indirect consequence of Confederate independence.
In Curious Notions of the Crosstime Traffic series, Imperial Germany is victorious in the 20th century's three world wars, becoming the dominant world power by 2096. This results in Germany restoring the monarchies of numerous countries including Brazil. The unnamed Emperor of Brazil is among the numerous monarchs who attend the Kaiser in Berlin in a glittering annual ceremony broadcast live worldwide.


=== Bulgaria ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Kyril I, the Tsar of Bulgaria in Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, if the Legion choose to restore the monarchy.
Nikolay II, a Georgian noble in Pax Britannica.
In the Presence of Mine Enemies by Harry Turtledove

During Horst Witzleben's Seven O’Clock News, an unnamed Tsar of Bulgaria is reported as welcoming the Poglavnik of Croatia during a state visit. The unnamed Tsar is also one of many fascist puppet or sympathizing heads of state to commiserate the death of the German Führer, Kurt Haldweim.
Year of the Rabbit

Prince Hector, the heir to the Bulgarian throne, attends Balkan peace talks in London but is kidnapped whilst under the protection of Detective Inspector Eli Rabbit and his team. His sister, Princess Juliana, is revealed to be the perpetrator of the kidnapping, wanting the Bulgarian throne for herself. She is also an expert sharpshooter and a member of the secret organization, 'the Vision'.


== C ==


=== Cambodia ===
Shadowrun

King Sindarath Sisowath


=== Canada ===
Sam & Max Save the World

Sybil Pandemick, a neighbour of Sam and Max known for regularly changing careers, briefly reigns as Queen of Canada after answering a job advertisement, continuing to work out of her office in New York City. After magician and Prismatology cult leader Hugh Bliss hypnotizes the world to provide nourishment (being, in fact, a sentient bacteria colony), Sybil agrees to purchase the United States for one hundred trillion Canadian dollars (which Sam uses to help take down Bliss). The United States is incorporated into Canada and is renamed 'Lower Manitoba'.


=== China and the Greater Chinese Empire ===
Curse of the Golden Flower

Emperor Ping is the imperial ruler of the Tang dynasty and the father of Princes Wan, Jai and Yu, who is in the place of Puyuan and takes Princess Phoenix to be his Empress in the 2006 Chinese film Curse of the Golden Flower.
Mulan

An unnamed Emperor is the wise, old ruler of China who makes Fa Mulan an honorary heroine for saving him and his empire from the Huns, in Disney's animated film Mulan and its live-action remake, which based on the legendary folklore about Hua Mulan. His literary basis might be Emperor Taiwu of Northern Wei.
The Mummy: Tomb of the Dragon Emperor

Emperor Han (portrayed by Jet Li) was a Chinese warlord who succeeded in becoming the first Emperor of China. However, his quest for immortality ultimately led to his being cursed and entombed. He was later resurrected but was defeated by Rick O'Connell and his son before he could extend his reach to enslave the Earth.
War of the Worlds: Global Dispatches

In the story "Foreign Devils" by Walter Jon Williams, the Martians of H. G. Wells's War of The Worlds land in Qing China, destroy Beijing and cause widespread death and destruction throughout the country, but the Guangxu Emperor survives by fleeing to a faraway province. In the aftermath the Emperor – whose plans for reform were foiled in actual history – takes advantage of the chaos to stage a bloody coup and establish himself strongly in power. He then the uses the disarray of European powers, still recovering from the Martian invasion of their home territories, to shake off colonial tutlelage and make China a world power 50 years ahead of schedule. China in this history will remain a monarchy, there will be no Chinese Republic nor a Communist Chinese regime, and there will be many more new Emperors from among the progeny of the Guangxu Emperor.


=== Colombia ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Bolivar III, the emperor of Gran Colombia in Pax Britannica.


=== Croatia ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Tomislav II is the king of the Italian client state of Croatia in The New Order: Last Days of Europe. He found himself as the head of a nation which he had no love for. He didn't speak a word of Croatian nor had he even ever been there, as he was picked simply because of his noble blood.
You Rang, M'Lord?

King Boris and Queen of Dalmatia (portrayed by Davy Kaye and Deddie Davies) are the former rulers whose royal family are exiled to Great Britain after a communist revolution there, in the season 2 episode "Royal Flush".


== D ==


=== Denmark ===
Hamlet by William Shakespeare

King Hamlet was the previous monarch of Denmark and the father of Prince Hamlet. His ghost appears at night and beckons his living son to follow his instructions. He is loosely based on Horwendill, the legendary Jutish chieftain.
King Claudius poisoned his brother King Hamlet to become the new monarch of Denmark and to be married to Queen Gertrude, Prince Hamlet's mother. He is loosely based on the Jutish chieftain Feng.
The Prince & Me

Haraald, the former King of Denmark in the film The Prince & Me and its sequel The Prince & Me 2: The Royal Wedding.
Edvard III, Haraald's son, becomes the King of Denmark with Paige Morgan as his Queen.


== E ==


=== Egypt ===
The Mummy

Seti I (portrayed by Aharon Ipalé) was the Pharaoh of Ancient Egypt in 1290 BC until his death at the hands of his most faithful high priest, Imhotep, and his future wife, Anck-Su-Namun.
Sam & Max: The Devil's Playhouse

Sammun-Mak was a powerful telepathic ten-year-old who ruled as Pharaoh after overthrowing the royal family. After his brain is placed in the body of Max (after Max's brain was stolen), Sammun-Mak uses the Devil's Toybox to create an alternate reality in which he is supreme ruler.


== F ==


=== Finland ===
Hearts of Iron IV

King Fredrik Kaarle I
In Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, he rules the Kingdom of Finland and has significant power compared to other monarchs in the nearby regions.
King Väinö I
Frederick Charles's son and successor in the same mod.
King Ralph

King Gustav (portrayed by Julian Glover)
He and the Finnish royal family visit the United Kingdom shortly after King Ralph I's accession to the British throne. The purpose of the visit is to arrange a royal marriage between Ralph and Princess Anna of Finland and to negotiate the purchasing of off-shore drilling equipment following the discovery of oil reserves in the Baltic Sea. The arranged marriage is called off after King Gustav is given photographs showing Ralph with Miranda, an exotic dancer.


=== France ===
Bring the Jubilee by Ward Moore

Napoleon VI
He is mentioned as the Emperor of France reigning sometime around the 1930s with his scandalous personal life being gossiped about in American publications.
Hearts of Iron IV

Jean III
The king of France in Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg if Action Française takes power.
Henry VI
Jean III's son and successor in the same mod.
Franz I
A German nobleman who can be put on the French throne in the HOI4 mod, Pax Britannica.
Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers

Minnie Mouse portrays the role of a princess (apparently the daughter of King Louis XIII and Queen Anne, which would make her a female equivalent of Louis XIV) who rules the Kingdom of France but is a victim of being overthrown by the villainous Pete (see princess and dragon). In real-life such an ascension would be contrary to Salic Law.
Monty Python’s Flying Circus

In the episode "The Golden Age of Ballooning", a Scottish conman (played by Michael Palin) poses as the French monarch, claiming to be Louis XIV, Louis XV, Louis XVI and Louis XVII.
The Peshawar Lancers by S. M. Stirling

Napoleon VI is mentioned as the Emperor of France-outre-mer in an alternate 2025 where, in 1878, a meteor shower known as 'The Fall' rendered the Northern Hemisphere uninhabitable, forcing European metropolitan governments to evacuate to their colonies. France-outre-mer encompasses French North Africa and reclaimed French, Spanish and Portuguese coastal territories, with its capital based in Algiers. King-Emperor John II arranges the marriage of his daughter Sita to the heir to the throne of France-outre-mer, partly to establish an Anglo-French condominium over the Sultanate of Egypt and re-open the Suez Canal. Although the regnal name was claimed by Louis, Prince Napoléon, if he is based on a real person, the date would indicate this is either Charles, Prince Napoléon or Jean-Christophe, Prince Napoléon.
The Short Reign of Pippin IV by John Steinbeck

Pippin Arnulf Héristal, a descendant of Charlemagne, is crowned as Pippin IV to provoke a rebellion.
Southern Victory Series by Harry Turtledove

Charles XI
After France's defeat during the First Great War, he becomes King of France between the late 1920s and 1930 after Action Française takes control of the country, ending the French Third Republic, and restores the monarchy. He serves as the King of France for fourteen years and leads his country into another war with the German Empire after the new Kaiser Wilhelm III refuses to return Alsace-Lorraine to France. He is later killed in 1944 when Germany destroys most of Paris with an atomic bomb.
He might be a fictional son of the Orléanist pretender Prince Philippe, Duke of Orléans who was a claimant to the French throne as Philip VIII or the Legitimist (and Carlist) pretender Alfonso Carlos, Duke of San Jaime, who used Charles XII as a claimed regnal name due to counting his brother as the real Charles XI (compare Louis XVII, who also never reigned). Turtledove clarified that Charles XI was not Charles Maurras, the founder and leader of Action Française.
Louis XIX
Following Charles XI's death, he is succeeded by Louis XIX. While he initially announced France's intention to continue to fight Germany, he ultimately accepts capitulation. There is no equivalent son of Alfonso Carlos or grandson of Prince Philippe, who both died childless.
To Kill Napoleon, Whatever the Cost by Elizabeth Williams

Napoleon VI is the French Emperor in 1973 in an alternate timeline where Napoleon I imposed a crushing defeat on Britain in 1807.
The Two Georges by Richard Dreyfuss and Harry Turtledove

François IV is mentioned as being the King of the Holy Alliance, a union of the French and Spanish Empires and the British Empire's main rival.
The Virgin & the Wheels by L. Sprague de Camp

Napoleon V is the Emperor of the French in an alternate universe in which New York City was seemingly under Bonpartist occupation enforced by looting Spanish soldiers.
Through Darkest Europe by Harry Turtledove

Jean XXIII is mentioned as the King of France in an alternate reality where Islamic North Africa and the Middle East constituted the modern, liberal First World, and Europe was a backward hotspot of Christian fundamentalist terrorism. Reigning during the fifteenth century AH, his son the Dauphin is hospitalized during an Aquinist attack on the funeral of Grand Duke Cosimo III of Italy.


== G ==


=== Georgia ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Giorgi XI, the king of Georgia in Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, if the monarchy is restored.


=== Germany ===
Archduke Franz Ferdinand Lives! by Richard Ned Lebow

As a result of Archduke Franz Ferdinand never being assassinated, neither of the world wars occur. Germany remains a monarchy into the twenty-first century, with the unnamed Kaiser's niece Princess Elizabetha (named for Elizabeth II) being engaged to be married to Prince Harry.
The Shape of Things to Come by H. G. Wells

Prince Manfred of Bavaria is the leader of a worldwide rebellion against a nascent world government sometime during the late twentieth century.
Books by Harry Turtledove

Wilhelm III (or Friedrich I of Germany and Friedrich Wilhelm V of Prussia)
In the Southern Victory series, he refuses to return Alsace-Lorraine to the new Kingdom of France, which acts as the casus belli for the Second Great War in Europe, during the course of which he authorizes the atomic bombings of London, Norwich, Brighton, Paris and Petrograd. When the death of Wilhelm II was announced, it was reported that the new Kaiser would adopt two different regnal names for Germany and Prussia, although he is not referenced by name for the remainder of the series.
In Curious Notions, he leads Germany during an analogue of the Second World War in the late 1930s, resulting in Germany becoming the dominant power in Europe.
Wilhelm IV: In Curious Notions, he leads Germany during the Third World War circa 1956, during which numerous cities across the United States were devastated in nuclear blasts (San Francisco only being spared due to a German nuclear bomber plane being shot down). A bronze statue of him is mentioned as being situated outside of the San Francisco City Hall.
Hearts of Iron IV

Wilhelm III succeeds his father in Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, in 1941, which was also the year of the real Wilhelm II's death. He is a reactionary and favors a dictatorship of Paul von Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff. Close to the anti-parliamenterist, Kurt von Schleicher. A rare path can see him become a Reichpräsident (similar to Napoleon III before his putsch).
Wilhelm IV, a possible puppet Emperor if the overlord is not socialist. Also a possible head of state in rare scenarios, which include a restoration by Max Bauer or him being a Reichpräsident like his father.
Friedrich Wilhelm V, a member of the Romanov family that replaces the Hohenzollern dynasty.
The Gate of Time by Philip José Farmer

Wilhelm IV leads an expansionist, imperialist Germany in his timeline's version of the Second World War.


=== Greece ===
If It Had Happened Otherwise edited by J. C. Squire

George I – In Harold Nicolson's short story If Byron Had Become King of Greece, Lord Byron survives his illness in 1824, becomes the chief military strategist in the Greek War of Independence against the Ottoman Empire and is crowned King in the 1830s.


=== Guatemala ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Ubico I
In Pax Britannica, Ubico becomes an absolutist emperor after overthrowing Guatemala's democratic government.


== H ==


=== Hawaii ===
Days of Infamy by Harry Turtledove

Stanley Owana Laanui and Cynthia Laanui – In the Days of Infamy series, set in an alternate timeline where Japan not only attacked Pearl Harbor but also fully occupied the Hawaiian Islands, Laanui (an obscure but fictional member of the former Hawaiian Royal Family) is installed as a puppet 'King of Hawaii'. He chooses Cynthia Laanui to be his consort.
Hearts of Iron IV

Lili'uokalani II, the queen of Hawaii in Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, if the old monarchy can be restored.
Shadowrun

King Kamehameha IV
King Kamehameha V
King Kamehameha VI


=== Hungary ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Prince Wilhelm of Sweden, a democratic king.
Friedrich Franz of Mecklenburg-Schwerin, a fascist king.
Otto von Habsburg, a non-aligned Habsburg king.


== I ==


=== India ===
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory by Roald Dahl

Prince Pondicherry wants to rule India in his own chocolate palace, rejecting Willy Wonka's warning to eat it all before it melts. But despite his insistence, the prince's chocolate palace later melts on the hot sunny day. His name derives from the city of Pondicherry.
The Jungle Book

King Louie is an orangutan and the leader of the Bandar-log tribe, who acts like the monkey king of the Ancient Ruins and attempts to gain knowledge of fire from the "man-cub", Mowgli, to be more like a human. He is inspired by his voice actor, American jazz singer Louis Prima. In the live-action remake, Louie is enlarged, similar to a Gigantopithecus.


=== Iran/Persia ===
Books by Harry Turtledove

In the Crosstime Traffic series, an unnamed Shah is mentioned as being the ruler of Iran in the 2092 of the 'home timeline', operating a police state. The restored Iranian monarchy may have been the result of several 'Iran Interventions' mentioned in The Disunited States of America.
Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time

King Sharaman (portrayed by Ronald Pickup) is the monarch of Persia, the father of Princes Tus and Garsiv and the adoptive father of Dastan, in Disney's 2010 film which based on the video game of the same name.


=== Iraq ===
Iznogoud

Haroun El Poussah is a benevolent and benign caliph of Baghdad who Iznogoud serves as his grand vizier and who only cares about sleeping, eating and having lazy fun. His name is a pun on the historical Caliph Harūn al-Rashīd.
La Rosa di Bagdad (The Singing Princess)

Caliph Oman III is a benevolent ruler of Baghdad whose 13-year-old niece Princess Zeila performs her lovely songs with music performed by snake charmer Amin.
The Thief and the Cobbler

King Nod is the sleepy ruler of Baghdad (also known as the Golden City), the father of Princess Yum-Yum and father-in-law of Tack the Cobbler.


=== Italy ===
The Alteration by Kingsley Amis

In the alternate 1976 depicted in the novel, amongst the numerous crowned heads of Europe attending the funeral of Stephen III of England is an unspecified King of Naples, the ascendency of the Catholic Church as a secular power preventing the unification of Italy. In real life Naples had been united with Sicily to form the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. In 1976 there were two pretenders: Charles (I) and Ferdinand (IV).
Books by Harry Turtledove

Umberto III – In the alternate 2010 depicted in In the Presence of Mine Enemies, Italy (like Spain and Portugal) is an ally of the Greater German Reich and possesses its own empire but is compelled to carry out racial policies such as the extermination of Arabs in its territories. The Italian King is a figurehead but does hold influence in domestic politics. Possibly a version of Emanuele Filiberto of Savoy, Prince of Venice, where the naming of his father and grandfather after their grandfathers continued and established something similar to Denmark's swapping between Fredericks and Christians.
Cosimo III – In the alternate timeline depicted in Through Darkest Europe, due to the adoption by Thomas Aquinas and Al-Ghazali of opposite positions regarding the compatibility of reason and religion than in real-life, Islamic North Africa and the Middle East are the "liberal, tolerant, and above all rich" First World whilst Christian Europe is an impoverished hotspot of Christian fundamentalist terrorism. By the alternate fifteenth century AH, Cosimo is the Grand Duke of Italy (except for Sicily, which is still under Maghrebi control) and is regarded as a strongman. He is killed by an Aquinist suicide bomber. The name was used by the House of Medici, which included several Grand Dukes of Tuscany among whom there was a Cosimo III.
Lorenzo III – Grand Duke of Italy in Through Darkest Europe, he succeeded his father Cosimo III.
Hearts of Iron IV

Ferdinand III, the king of Italy and the head of the House of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, in Pax Britannica.
Romeo and Juliet by William Shakespeare

Prince Escalus is the reigning prince of Verona. He is possibly based on Bartolomeo I of the Scaliger family.
Sidewise in Time by Murray Leinster

Valerius Fabricus is mentioned to be the current Emperor in a parallel universe where the Roman Empire never fell and colonized America.
The Tempest by William Shakespeare

King Alonso is the monarch of Naples and the father of Prince Ferdinand. This combination occurred twice during the 15th century, when Alfonso I of Naples was the father of Ferdinand I of Naples and Alfonso II of Naples was the father of Ferdinand II of Naples. The other characters in the story, however, have no namesakes.


== J ==


=== Japan and the Greater Japanese Empire ===
Books by Harry Turtledove

In In the Presence of Mine Enemies, set in an alternate timeline where the Axis Powers won the Second World War, an unnamed Emperor of Manchukuo (a subordinate ruler within the Japanese Greater East Asia Sphere of Co-Prosperity) is one of many heads of state who commiserate the death of the Führer, Kurt Haldweim. It might be Puyi or his brother Pujie.
In Joe Steele, Japan surrenders to the Americans in the South and the Soviets in the North. The U.S. establishes the Constitutional Monarchy of Japan. However, with Emperor Hirohito being killed during an air raid towards the end of the war, Hirohito's 12-year-old son Akihito becomes the new emperor, although he is only a figure head, as it is General Dwight D. Eisenhower who really runs the country.
The Tale of Genji by Murasaki Shikibu

The Kiritsubo emperor
Emperor Suzaku [ja], the Kiritsubo emperor's son and immediate successor
Emperor Reizei [ja], Suzaku's successor and supposedly also a son of the Kiritsubo emperor but secretly a son of the protagonist, Hikaru Genji
The Peshawar Lancers by S. M. Stirling

In this novel, Akihito is the Emperor of Dai-Nippon (Greater Japan) in 2025. Dai-Nippon, with its capital based in Peking, encompasses Japan, Mainland China, Korea, the Philippine Islands, most of Southeast Asia, Outer Manchuria, Taiwan, Sakhalin, and coastal colonies in Siberia and Alaska. Regarding the Fall as beneficial, Dai-Nippon rivals the Angrezi Raj.
Shadowrun

Emperor Kenichi
Emperor Yasuhito


=== Jordan ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Nayef bin Abdullah
Abdullah I's successor in The New Order: Last Days of Europe.


== L ==


=== Liechtenstein ===
Cabin Pressure

King Maximilian – In the episode "Vaduz", the crew of MJN Air are hired to fly King Maximilian (played by Kieran Hodgson) to Fitton. Unbeknownst to them, however, is the fact that Maximilian is a young boy, the posthumous and only son of the previous King, preceded by six older sisters with the eldest, Princess Theresa (played by Matilda Ziegler) acting as Regent. Having become King at such a young age, Maxi constantly flouts his title and power for trivial reasons which his pilot, Captain Martin Crieff, says would not make him popular in the long-term (based on his own experiences). After Princess Theresa covers for Crieff for accidentally ordering too much fuel, the two begin dating.


=== Lithuania ===
Gunpowder Empire by Harry Turtledove

King Kuzmickas
In this alternate history, the Roman Empire never fell and remained strong and powerful to the end the 21st century and beyond, eventually gaining firearms and developing a technology roughly similar to our 17th century. Eventually, the rival Lietuvan Empire developed to its north and east (roughly similar to the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth). The two evenly matched empires were in permanent cold war, sometimes turning hot. One such occasion was when King Kuzmickas of Lietuva mobilised his army and tried to conquer the city of Polisso, capital of the Roman province of Dacia. He placed the city under siege and came very close to capturing it, but in the end had to withdraw. The ceasefire was worked out by a young Roman emissary Ieremeo Soltero whose eloquence impressed the king.
Hearts of Iron IV

King Vytautas II
In Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, Vytautas is a German Catholic ruler whose Kingdom of Lithuania is an extremely and ethnically divided puppet state. He stands in the shadow of his popular father, King Mindaugas II, is pretty much a puppet of his ministers and despised by Lithuanian nationalists.
King Mindaugas III
Karl Gero's younger brother in the same mod.


== M ==


=== Madagascar ===
Madagascar

King Julien XII (also known as Uncle King Julien)
He is a strict, lazy, paunchy and cowardly old ring-tailed lemur who was the previous ruler of the Lemur Kingdom in the island of Madagascar in the Netflix animated series All Hail King Julien. He has been told by Masikura the panther chameleon that he would get eaten by the foosa, although the prophecy did not say that all of him would be bit. So he left his island and abdicated the throne in favor of his nephew, who became King Julien XIII of Madagascar. However, the original King Julien became devious as he returned to the island and tried to reclaim the throne from his nephew. In the end, he decided to give up his evil plans and start a new and better life.
King Julien XIII
He is the Indian-accented ring-tailed lemur who has been a ruler of the Lemur Kingdom in Madagascar after his uncle's abdication, using mostly his delegation and charisma, and loves to throw a party with his subjects. In All Hail King Julien, Julien has been against not only his uncle but also his parents Princess Julienne and Prince Barty. He has his own royal advisor Maurice the aye-aye and befriends Mort the mouse lemur and four zoo animals, Alex the Lion, Marty The Zebra, Melman the giraffe and Gloria The Hippo, from New York City. Julien even has his position passed down to Stevie, the leaf-tailed gecko who forms part of his crown.


=== Mexico ===
The Alteration by Kingsley Amis

An unnamed Emperor of Mexico is mentioned in conversation between the castrati Mirabilis and Viaventosa. The nature of the Mexican Empire is unclear, as the Viceroyalty of New Spain also exists.
Hearts of Iron IV

Agustin IV, the emperor of Mexico in Pax Britannica.
Southern Victory Series by Harry Turtledove

Maximilian I
With the War of Secession ending in a Confederate victory in 1862, France and Napoleon III is able to concentrate on intervention in Mexico, winning the war and installing Maximilian I to the throne shortly afterwards. He would serve as the Emperor of Mexico until at least 1880 and his dynasty he founded there would remain in power through the Second Great War, relying on France and the Confederacy for protection from the wrath of the United States. Maximilian's installation was a violation of the Monroe Doctrine. The French and Confederates prevented the U.S. from enforcing the doctrine, thus effectively shooting it between the eyes.
Maximilian II
He had served as the Emperor of Mexico since at least 1880. He maintained the close ties between his country and France. In 1881, with his nation desperate for money, Maximilian decided to sell the Mexican states of Chihuahua and Sonora to the Confederate States, which would cause the Second Mexican War with the United States. Maximilian I has no real-life equivalent since his marriage to Charlotte of Belgium was childless by the time of his death. He had adopted Agustín and Salvador Iturbide.
Francisco José I
He served as the Emperor of Mexico after Maximilian II. During his reign as emperor, he saw Mexico entering the Great War on the side of the Entente Powers with the Confederate States, the United Kingdom, France, and Russia.
Maximilian III
He served as the Emperor of Mexico after Francisco Jose I. During his reign as emperor during the late 1910s and early 1920s, anti-Habsburg revolutionaries sought to remove him from the throne and sparked the Mexican Civil War in 1917. He served as the emperor until at least 1942 and saw the beginning of the Second Great War and Mexico join the Entente Powers once again.
Francisco José II
He served as the Emperor of Mexico after Maximilian III and was the emperor during the Second Great War. He reluctantly supplied troops to the Confederacy, who were used to both help attack the United States and later defend the Confederacy from US counter-attacks.
After U.S. General Irving Morrell's major breakthrough at Pittsburgh came at the expense of poorly-equipped Mexican troops, Francisco Jose II refused to allow his men to participate in any more major battles against the United States. This would result in Mexico losing the Baja California peninsula to the United States. Confederate President Jake Featherston, after unsuccessfully attempting to change the Emperor's mind, finally acquiesced. Mexican troops were instead used to battle the black guerrilla fighters in the southern part of the Confederacy. Francisco José II was one of the few leaders of a Great Powers nation not forced to resign or abdicate after the alliance's defeat in the Second Great War.
Job: A Comedy of Justice by Robert A. Heinlein

Among the many alternate timelines visited by the protagonists, there is one in which late 20th century Mexico is a monarchy, ruled by an unnamed king.


=== Mongolia and the Mongol Empire ===
Times Without Number by John Brunner

King Mahendra the White Elephant
In an alternative history equivalent of the year 1988, King Mahendra the white elephant is a decadent Indian usurper sitting the throne of a Mongol Empire ruling all Asia and all Europe. Under his rule, Christianity is suppressed. He has in his court a corps of female gladiators, adept at martial arts and archery, who "fight like Hashishin" and who speak a dialect of Chinese different from all those spoken in our reality.


=== Montenegro ===
Hearts of Iron IV

King Nikola II
Featured in the HOI4 mod, The New Order: Last Days of Europe.


=== Morocco ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Hassan II of Morocco
Featured in The New Order: Last Days of Europe, claims independence after the collapse of the Iberian Union.


== N ==


=== Netherlands ===
Shadowrun

Queen Amalia


=== Nigeria ===
The Simpsons

The King of Nigeria (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson)
In the Season 26 episode "The Princess Guide", the King of Nigeria makes a uranium deal with Mr. Burns as with his daughter Princess Kemi staying in Springfield. While he is doing so, Homer Simpson is made to watch over Kemi at the apartment but later ends up taking her to see Moe Szyslak. Though initially displeased with Kemi since he suspects her brother stole money from him, Moe befriends her and takes her on a journey across Springfield when Homer is arrested by Chief Wiggum shortly after her disappearance. However, Homer gets angry when he finds that Moe has taken his job to guide the princess. And when Kemi kisses Moe, the paparazzo takes a picture which is quickly viewed on the internet by the Nigerian King, leading him to decide not to sign the uranium deal with Burns. The King wants to punish Kemi for kissing Moe, but Homer urges him to let his daughter live her life as she wants, for which he accepts.


=== Norway ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Vladimir I, the King of Norway in Pax Britannica, if the Norwegians successfully overthrow the Danes.


== P ==


=== Peru ===
The Adventures of Tintin

The Prince of the Sun
The reigning prince who rules the Sun-worshipping Inca Empire in the fourteenth volume of the Tintin comics. He resides in the hidden Temple of the Sun deep within the Andes mountain range where he meets Tintin and Captain Haddock sent by a Peruvian boy named Zorrino. The Prince also appears in the animated film adaptation, Tintin and the Temple of the Sun, where he is the father of Princess Maita.
The Emperor's New Groove

Emperor Kuzco
He is the young, selfish, and callous ruler of the Inca Empire who loves to dance to the groove every morning but has a sense of style and charm. Kuzco befriends a farmer and llama herder, Pacha, and eventually learns the meaning of friendship and generosity after he was transformed into a llama by his former advisor and self-proclaimed sorceress Yzma (who attempted to poison him to claim the throne for herself) and her muscular but somewhat dimwitted henchman Kronk Pepikrankenitz. His name is a reference to the ancient city of Cusco.


=== Poland ===
Hearts of Iron IV

King Augustus IV
In Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, he is the fourth son of Kaiser Wilhelm II who rules the Kingdom of Poland but is hated by Polish nationalists and socialists alike, as he does not show real interest in the Polish nation.
King Alexander II
August IVs son and successor in the same mod.


=== Portugal ===
The Alteration by Kingsley Amis

The unnamed King of Portugal is mentioned as being in attendance at the funeral of Stephen III of England in 1976. In 1976 the real life pretender was Duarte (II) Nuno, who died on Christmas Eve and was succeeded by Duarte (III) Pio.
Curious Notions by Harry Turtledove

In an alternate timeline, Imperial Germany became the dominant world power by 2096, following its victories in the 20th century's three world wars. As result, Germany restored the monarchies of various countries including Portugal. The King of Portugal is among the many monarchs annually attending the Kaiser in Berlin, in a glittering ceremony broadcast live worldwide.
Hearts of Iron IV

Duarte II
In Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, he is the King of Portugal and the Algarves, ruling since 2 July 1932. Duarte is suspected to maintain relations with opposition members and old-guard monarchists from the Paiva Couceiro era, with the greater aim to achieve a "National Restoration" and to remove the Integralists from power.


== R ==


=== Romania ===
Hearts of Iron IV

King Nicholas I
In Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, he can be made king if the Legionaries win the power struggle and force Carol II to abdicate.


=== Russia and the Russian Empire ===
The Alteration by Kingsley Amis

The novel is set in an alternate 1976. The Crown Prince of Muscovy is mentioned as being in attendance at the funeral of King Stephen III of England. Muscovy is mentioned as possessing a North American colony called New Muscovy.
Anastasia

Marie Feodorovna Romanov is the Dowager Empress of Imperial Russia, who managed to escape from the evil Rasputin during the Russian Revolution. But during the escape, she inadvertently left behind her youngest granddaughter, Grand Duchess Anastasia, who suffered amnesia as the result of a head injury.
Tsar Nicholas II Romanov was the last monarch of Imperial Russia and the father of Grand Duchess Anastasia. Rasputin placed a curse on Nicholas's royal family, sparking the Russian Revolution.
And Having Writ... by Donald R. Bensen

Nicholas II
Nicholas II meets up with the four alien explorers Raf, Ari, Valmis and Dark at Tsarskoe Selo in 1909. After his son Alexei falls and strikes his head on a desk, the aliens and the Tsar discuss the czarevitch's haemophilia and after a finding out that his son lacks the protein in his blood and that he has the protein, agrees to a blood transfusion with the help of Dark's machine. His son is cured within three days and results in nationwide rejoicing at this news and Grigori Rasputin is thrown out the Palace by Imperial soldiers. Czar Nicholas is so boundlessly thankful for the aliens deed and arranges safe passage to Spain for the Explorers, who are still being pursued by American Marines. In addition, the Czar promises to seriously consider everything that Ari has told him about the possibility of a World War. However, with either World War I or the Russian Revolution occurring, Nicholas remained on the Russian throne until between 1918 and 1933.
Alexei II
With his haemophilia cured in 1909, Alexei grows up a healthy person. He succeed the Russian throne by 1933. During their 1933 tour of Earth, which the four alien explorers undertake just prior to their departure from Earth, they are received by Alexei, who is now the Czar of Russia. During the encounter, Raf describes him as a "strapping young lad."
Back in the USSA by Eugene Byrne and Kim Newman

Nicholas III is the Russian Tsar in 1972 as depicted in Abdication Street. His daughter, Duchess Ekaterina, is intended to marry Charles, Duke of Cornwall, the great-nephew and heir apparent of Edward VIII. He might be Prince Nicholas Romanov or a fictional son of Alexei II.
Hearts of Iron IV

Kirill I
Featured in the HOI4 mod, Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg.
Vladimir III
Kirill's son and successor in the same mod.
Dmitri III
Dimitri can restore his family to the throne as he declares himself the new Tsar.
Pyotr Wrangel
Wrangel can crown himself as Tsar Pyotr IV if he continues his military rule.
Michael II
The Tsar of Russia in Pax Britannica.
The Peshawar Lancers by S. M. Stirling

Grand Duke Nikolai is the de facto tsar of the Russian Empire in 2025. By the alternate 2025 of the novel, the Empire is centered around Samarkand and has adopted regressive religious practices such as ritualistic cannibalism and worship of Chernobog.
Southern Victory Series by Harry Turtledove

Nicholas II
In 1914, when Austria-Hungary issued a number of ultimata to Serbia following the assassination of Franz Ferdinand by a Serb in Sarajevo, Nicholas II promised to support the Serbs should they refuse the ultimata. They did, and Russia declared war on Austria-Hungary, which had declared war on Serbia. The Great War followed. In 1917, Nicholas found himself facing a Red Revolution, followed by a protracted civil war, which resulted in Russia backing out of the Great War. Ultimately, Nicholas and his supporters triumphed, and Nicholas remained emperor for the remainder of the 1920s and died in the early 1930s. The destruction resulting from the wars left Russia in such a poor state that in 1929 she was forced to suspend payment of a loan to Austria-Hungary. This caused a chain effect that led in turn to the worldwide stock market crash of that year. Following his death, Nicholas was succeeded as Tsar by his younger brother, Michael II.
Michael II
The Grand Duke succeeds his older brother, Nicholas II, as the Tsar of Russia sometime in the early 1930s, reigning until the end of the Second Great War when he is forced to pursue an armistice with the Central Powers and to relinquish the throne after a German superbomb is dropped on Petrograd.
Triumph of a Tsar by Tamar Anolic

Alexei II
What Might Have Been

Constantine I
In the story What If Napoleon Triumphs in Russia by Adam Zamoyski, after the French Empire's victory over Russia and Alexander I's flight from Pskov to a remote monastery, Grand Duke Constantine was installed by Napoleon as Tsar on 15 August 1813. Tsar Constantine I was considered a weak leader, being forced to relinquish the Baltic territories, return Finland to Sweden and to send Russian troops to help France fight in Spain. Constantine faced a peasant's revolt led by a false pretender claiming to be Alexander I but was ultimately assassinated in 1827, replaced by his younger brother Nicholas. The real Constantine renounced his rights to marry morganatically and Nicholas succeeded outright after the Russian interregnum of 1825 caused by the renounciation not being made public before Alexander's death and causing the Decembrist revolt.
Y: The Last Man by Brian K. Vaughan and Pia Guerra

Vladimir Jr.
In the comic book series, all mammals with a Y chromosome with the exception of amateur escape artist Yorick Brown and his Capuchin monkey, Ampersand died in an unexplained cataclysm on 17 July 2002. Vladimir Jr., the son of Russian astronauts Ciba Weber and Vladimir conceived on the International Space Station, is the only other living male on Earth, having been born after the cataclysm. In the final issue Alas (#60), set six decades after the main tenure of the series, it is revealed that Vladimir became the Czar of Russia, by which time a cis-male population is re-established, albeit limited to thousands worldwide and consisting of clones of Yorick and men who died in the cataclysm.


== S ==


=== Spain ===
Bring the Jubilee by Ward Moore

In an alternate timeline where the Confederate States won the 'War of Southern Independence', one consequence is the revitalization of the Spanish Empire consisting of the Spanish West Indies, the Spanish East Indies and Spanish Africa (all of mainland Latin America being annexed by the Confederacy) and allied to the German Union. The terrorist organization, the Grand Army, attempted to spare the United States from an inevitable war between the Confederacy and the German Union by counterfeiting Spanish currency. An unnamed King is mentioned as ruling during the 1950s by an official investigating this.
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides

King Ferdinand VI rules Spain from his palace in Cádiz. He sends his most trusted Spanish agent called the Spaniard to find and destroy the Fountain of Youth.
Times Without Number by John Brunner

Philip IX
In an alternative timeline where the Spanish Armada successfully invaded England in 1588, the 'Western Empire' (the successor to the Spanish Empire) encompasses France, England, the Spanish Netherlands, South America and Central America with a loose protectorate over a Mohawk-controlled North America; however, the Iberian Peninsula was turned into a 'New Khalifate' by Islamic invaders, forcing the relocation of the center of the Spanish Empire to Londres. In one of the book's episodes, the King and the entire Royal Family are killed by female warriors, masters of Martial arts, which were unwisely brought in from an Alternate History timeline; however, the book's time-traveling protagonist manages to change history and avert the disaster.
The Two Georges by Harry Turtledove and Richard Dreyfuss

In an alternate reality where American Revolution never occurred and British America remained within the British Empire, a personal union comprising the French and Spanish empires called the Holy Alliance is the British Empire's main rival; the Holy Alliance is dominated by its French half, ruled by François IV.
Hearts of Iron IV

Jaime I
Alfonso XIII's successor in Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg.
Juan III
Jamie I's younger brother in the same mod. He is also featured in The New Order: Last Days of Europe, where the collapse of the Iberian Union can have the House of Bourbon restored.
Xavier I
Xavier can become the king of Spain if the Carlists won the Spanish civil war.
Shadowrun

Juan Carlos II
Su majestad

Alfonso XIV
Pilar


=== Sweden ===
What Might Have Been

Joseph I
In the story What If Napoleon Triumphs in Russia by Adam Zamoyski, after the French Empire's victory over Russia, Napoleon returned Finland to Sweden and installed Józef Poniatowski as King. Jean-Baptiste Jules Bernadotte is executed for treason against France.
Young Royals

Queen Kristina (portrayed by Pernilla August)


== T ==


=== Thailand/Siam ===
The King and I

King Mongkut is the sovereign of Siam who is resided in the Grand Palace in Bangkok with his son Prince Chulalongkorn and other young royal children. Mongkut takes his request to British schoolteacher Anna Leonowens to tutor his children.
Shadowrun

King Rama XII


=== Turkey and the Ottoman Empire ===
The Alteration by Kingsley Amis

An unnamed Sultan-Calif of Turkey is mentioned with the Ottoman Empire surviving well into the 20th century and still controlling vast amounts of territory including the Balkans. The real life pretender in 1976 was Mehmed (VII) Abdulaziz.
Hearts of Iron IV

Abdulmejid II
In Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, he is the 37th Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, succeeding Sultan Mehmed VI Vahideddin in 1926. Abdülmejid is known as being relatively uninterested in politics and more fascinated with the fine art. Because of that, he mostly acts as a purely constitutional monarch.
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade

The Nazi expedition searching for the Holy Grail is shown to have been equipped by an unnamed Sultan of Hatay, in exchange for a Rolls-Royce Phantom II. The fictionalized Hatay monarchy is stated as being a "Republic" in the film.
The Ottoman Republic

Osman VII – The Ottoman Empire (known as the Ottoman Republic in the film) remains intact into the 21st century as a result of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk falling into a coma when he was seven years old and the Turkish War of Independence never happening as a result. Osman VII is little more than a figurehead and a source of ridicule by foreign dignitaries.
The Peshawar Lancers by S. M. Stirling

Al-Hussein is the ruler of the Caliphate of Damascus and the Caliph of Islam in the post-Fall world. The Caliphate is an Arab empire encompassing the former Ottoman Empire, the Balkans and Persia, born out of Arab revolts against the Ottoman Empire in the immediate aftermath of the Fall. It is the main rival of France-outre-mer and is the chief obstacle to the formation of an Anglo-French condominium over the Sultanate of Egypt.
Curious Notions by Harry Turtledove

In an alternate timeline, Imperial Germany became the dominant world power by 2096, following its victories in the 20th century's three world wars. The Ottoman Empire, having been Germany's loyal ally, survived to the end of the 21st century when the book's plot takes place, and probably beyond – though clearly subservient to Germany; the Germans prop up its government as they do with numerous other monarchies throughout the world. The Ottoman Sultan is among the many monarchs annually attending the Kaiser in Berlin, in a glittering ceremony broadcast live worldwide.


== U ==


=== The United Kingdom, England, Scotland and Ireland ===
2525

King George VII – Whilst a downsized British royal family (a couple living in a two bedroom flat in Tooting) recall the gradual decline of their family and the United Kingdom, they recall George VII seceding Earl's Court to Australia as one of the many secessions which broke up the country.
A Certain Magical Index

Queen Elizard – Debuted in the 17th light novel volume of the series. She is nearly deposed by her daughter, Princess Carissa, in a coup d'état with the Knights of England but managed to escape. She later used a magical artifact to help weaken her rebellious daughter and empower all of the peoples of the United Kingdom in the final battle against her in Buckingham Palace.
Arthur C. Clarke stories

King Henry IX, in the short story "Refugee", is still the Prince of Wales when Britain's first spaceport opens on Salisbury Plain. He stows away in a space freighter heading to Mars.
Anno Domini 2000, or, Woman's Destiny by Sir Julius Vogel

Emperor Albert is the ruler of the Federated British Empire. He falls in love with and marries the Imperial Prime Minister Hilda Fitzherbert and becomes ruler of the former United States after a war sparked by his refusal to marry the President's daughter. Emperor Albert and Empress Hilda's views on royal primogeniture are ironically reversed by their views of their daughter and son.
Anno Dracula series by Kim Newman

Dracula, who defeats his adversaries, marries Queen Victoria, and seizes control of Britain in Anno Dracula. He becomes first Prince Consort, and subsequently Lord Protector.
King Victor I in The Bloody Red Baron. The King is the real life Prince Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale, Queen Victoria's grandson and the second in the line of succession to the British throne from his birth in 1864 until his death in 1892.
Another Case of Milton Jones

Milton I, King of Middle England, played by Milton Jones. After accidentally leading a cavalry division over Tower Bridge (a treasonable offence) and fleeing London, Milton Jones briefly becomes King of Middle England due to his command over grammar and pronunciation in his former capacity as a royal speech therapist. He is captured after an uneventful war between the United Kingdom and Middle England and sentenced to death for treason, but is pardoned by the Queen after he cures Prince Herbert of his working class speech patterns by using rocket salad.
The Avengers

Queen Anne II
In The Avengers episode "Esprit de Corps", a Jacobitist coup against the British Government attempts to install Cathy Gale as Queen.
Back in the USSA

Edward VIII overcomes the abdication crisis of 1938 and remains as king until the 1970s.
He is succeeded by King Andrew and Queen Sarah, Charles, Duke of Cornwall having renounced his titles to marry a commoner.
Back to the Future Part II

Marty McFly's newspaper in the year 2015 has an article announcing a visit from Queen Diana to the United States.
Blackadder

Richard IV of England (and XII of Scotland), a fictionalized version of Richard of Shrewsbury, Duke of York (one of the Princes in the Tower), played by Brian Blessed. He reigned from 1485 to 1498, succeeding his 'kind and thoughtful' uncle, Richard III. However, Henry Tudor erased Richard IV's reign, the Yorkist victory during the Wars of the Roses and Richard III's true nature from history after his belated succession to the throne. The regnal number for Scotland would be I in real-life, and this is also the Jacobite name for Rupprecht of Bavaria.
Edmund the Blackadder, Richard IV's second son and the Duke of Edinburgh. He began a campaign to become King after being told by three witches that he would so (having been mistaken for Henry Tudor). After being mortally wounded from torture, he rules as King for thirty seconds after the entire court accidentally drank poisoned wine (which the Blackadder also drank).
Prince Ludwig the Indestructible, played by Hugh Laurie, killed Queen Elizabeth I and her court, which included Lord Blackadder, Lord Melchett, Lord Percy and Nursie, and disguised himself as the Queen, presumably continuing until the Queen's official death.
When Edmund Blackadder Esq. and George, the Prince Regent swap identities in order to get the latter out of a duel with the Duke of Wellington, Blackadder is saved by a cigarillo case presented by Wellington as a gift and the Prince Regent is shot by Wellington for impertinence when he reveals the ruse. The Prince Regent dies (although he first believed that he himself was saved by a cigarillo case but realized that he left it on the dresser) and Blackadder goes on to reign as George IV after George III mistakes him for his son.
Edmund III of the United Kingdom, played by Rowan Atkinson, became king in Blackadder: Back & Forth after using a time machine to alter history. He is married to Queen Marian of Sherwood and has installed Baldrick as a puppet prime minister after dissolving Parliament.
The Boleyn Trilogy by Laura Andersen

Henry IX
Books by William F. Buckley Jr.

In the 1976 novel Saving the Queen, Queen Caroline ascended the throne in 1951.
Books by Joan Aiken

James III of the United Kingdom (part of a House of Stuart dynasty which was not overthrown)
King in Joan Aiken's Black Hearts in Battersea
Possibly based on James Francis Edward Stuart
Richard IV of the United Kingdom
King in The Cuckoo Tree and Dido and Pa, Son of James III – he also appears as David Prince of Wales in The Whispering Mountain
Books by Kingsley Amis

Stephen II
Son of Arthur, Prince of Wales (d. 1502) and Katherine of Aragon.
His existence led his uncle Henry the Abominable to try to usurp the throne, but was foiled in the War of the English Succession.
Presumably, Stephen III and William V are his descendants.
Thereafter, King in The Alteration by Kingsley Amis.
Stephen III of England
King in The Alteration by Kingsley Amis. Having died before the start of the novel, it opens with his state funeral at the St George Basilica at Coverley, the ecclesiastical capital of England (superseding the secular capital in London) and the sight of the Holy Victory in the War of the English Succession.
He was presumably married to Winifred, mentioned as being the Queen Mother.
William V of England
King in The Alteration by Kingsley Amis
Son of Stephen III
Henry IX of England
King in The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick, the novel-within-a-novel depicting an alternate universe.
The real-life Henry, Duke of Cornwall, the son of Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon. In the novel-within-a-novel, he continues his father's Schismatic religious policies.
Elizabeth Tudor of England
Queen in Galliard by Keith Roberts (a pastiche of his novel Pavane), a novel-within-a-novel depicted in The Alteration by Kingsley Amis.
In Galliard, she is kidnapped and indoctrinated with Schismatic theology.
Unclear if she is Elizabeth I of England or a namesake.
Books by A. Bertram Chandler

The coronation of James XIV of the Jacobite Kingdom of Waverley is mentioned in one of Chandler's stories, described as a ceremony of great pomp and broadcast throughout the human-settled galaxy.
Books by Peter Dickinson

Victor I, the historic Albert Victor, Duke of Clarence and Avondale, survives the influenza pandemic in 1892 and goes on to marry his prospective bride Mary of Teck (as detailed in the preamble of King and Joker).
Victor II, the grandson of Victor I and Queen Mary, ascended to the throne at the age of 10 in 1938 (his father, the Prince of Wales, having drowned in a yachting accident a year previously). Despite being a qualified physician, the British government prevents him from practicing medicine over fears of lawsuits. He is secretly married bigamously to Isabella, the Queen Consort and her secretary, Anona Fellowes, the latter being Princess Louise's birth mother.
Books by Samuel Madden

Both Memoirs of the Twentieth Century and The Reign of King George VI, 1900–1925 mention King George VI. However, the George VI in Reign dies in 1925, whereas Memoirs takes place in 1997–98.
Books by Michael Moorcock

Gloriana I of Albion is the reigning monarch in Gloriana, or the Unfullfill'd Queen. She is Moorcock's antithesis of Queen Elizabeth I in this homage to Edmund Spenser's The Faerie Queene and Mervyn Peake's Gormenghast trilogy of novels.
King Hern VI of Albion is Gloriana I's father, a despot with echoes of Elizabeth I's father, King Henry VIII (deceased before Moorcock's novel opens).
Books by Harry Turtledove

Henry IX of the United Kingdom is the reigning monarch in In the Presence of Mine Enemies, an alternate history wherein the Axis won World War II. While the king has very little direct power (the Nazis having annexed the UK), he is able to affect the politics of his country, namely voicing his support for greater democracy within the Greater German Reich, which is the policy position of the leadership of the governing British Union of Fascists including Prime Minister Charles Lynton. His lineage is never addressed, but he might be Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester. The book mentions the Union of South Africa as an independent ally of the Reich which continues to practice Apartheid although it is unclear whether Henry IX is also the King of South Africa.
Charles III of the United Kingdom in The Two Georges, coauthored with Richard Dreyfus. While the character is described as being quite physically similar to the then-real-life Prince of Wales, the fictional Charles III is actually descended from Edward VIII. After the novel's protagonists, Thomas Bushell and Samuel Stanley of the Royal American Mounted Police, save King Charles from two assassination attempts by the nativist, separatist terrorist organization, the Sons of Liberty, he knights them as Members of the Order of the Two Georges for their services.
Edward VIII was able to retain his throne for much longer in both The Two Georges and the Southern Victory Series.
Edward IX is mentioned in The Two Georges as having reigned sometime in the 1970s, probably being the son of Edward VIII and the father or brother of Charles III.
Books by John Whitbourn
John Whitbourn had written several books set in a 'Catholic universe'.

Mary, Queen of Scots became Mary II of England following the death of Elizabeth I due to smallpox in 1562.
James I and VI
Charles I 'the Victor', who won the English Civil War against Parliament.
James 'the True' (possibly James II or James (III))
Charles III, whose reign during the nineteen century saw the prevention of a United Kingdom encompassing the whole of the British Isles through two Anglo-Scottish War.
Joseph the Wizard
Peter the Brave
Charles IV, King of England and Wales, Protector of Cornwall and Scilly.
Bring the Jubilee by Ward Moore

William V is mentioned in passing as being king sometime during the first half of the twentieth century.
Carolus Rex series by Andre Norton and Rosemary Edghill

Charles III: On his deathbed Charles II confirms James Scott, 1st Duke of Monmouth as his legitimate heir, avoiding Monmouth's Rebellion, the excesses of James II and the Glorious Revolution.
Charles IV: Presumably James Scott, Earl of Dalkeith.
James II
Charles V
Henry IX: King of the Great Britain as of 1805, the year the book is set in, and the great-great-grandson of Charles III.
Cars 2

Queen Elizabeth II is a classic Rolls-Royce Phantom car who watches the race from Buckingham Palace with her grandson Prince Wheeliam.
Chrestomanci series of books by Diana Wynne Jones

In Charmed Life, Cat Chant tells Janet Chant that the king is Charles VII.
Code Geass: Lelouch of the Rebellion

Charles zi Britannia (voiced by Norio Wakamoto)
The 98th Emperor of the Holy Britannia Empire and father of the main character, Lelouch Lamperouge. He installs his children in important positions in the Empire to see their true abilities. He views equality as an evil that must be dispelled and encourages social battle to maintain evolution within the society. As such, he publicly supports inequality and calls for competition and fighting so as to create progress.
Lelouch vi Britannia (voiced by Jun Fukuyama)
The 99th Emperor of the Holy Britannia Empire, as well as the titular character of series. When Lelouch ascended to the throne during, he quickly abolished many policies that grew during the Charles' reign. These include the abolishment of aristocratic system, financial conglomerates, and the liberation of colonies. This led to discontent, and thus, agents and loyalist to Emperor Lelouch routinely goes and put down dissidents.
Columbia & Britannia by Adam Chamberlain and Brian A. Dixon

George V, the fictional second-eldest son of Queen Victoria instead of Alfred, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha.
Edward VII is the eldest son of George V, analogous with Edward VIII. His relationship with his Québécois mistress Cynthia Grey and the resulting scandals almost result in him being forced to abdicate the throne. He retains the throne through a compromise stating that he and Grey should neither marry nor produce any children, the latter clause being broken by the births of their two (untitled) sons. Reigning from 1913 to 1918, he died heirless from acute pancreatitis.
George VI is the second eldest son of George V and the brother of Edward VII, analogous with the real-life George VI. He reigned from 1918 to 1953, overseeing Britain's effort in the War of Wars (1933–1943).
Elizabeth II is the eldest daughter of George VI, analogous with the real-life Elizabeth II. Reigning from 1953 to 1963, she was assassinated by an American separatist whilst visiting New York City during a walkabout.
George VII is the only child of Elizabeth II. After his mother's assassination, he becomes King at the age of five; Princess Margaret, Elizabeth II's sister, acts as Regent to George VII until his coronation on his eighteenth birthday in 1976. A withdrawn and private figure, his public popularity is maintained due to sympathy regarding the conditions of his succession. He reigned from 1963.
Doctor Who

Queen Liz 10 – Played by Sophie Okenedo, Elizabeth X is the ruler of the Starship UK in "The Beast Below", referring to herself and her predecessors by their abbreviated name and number.
Henry XII – Mentioned by Liz 10 as having the Doctor as a drinking buddy in The Beast Below.
The Night and the Doctor mini-series episode "Bad Night" features an unspecified Queen and Prince of Wales, the former appearing in the form of a goldfish and the latter speaking to the Eleventh Doctor and Amy Pond over the TARDIS telephone. The Doctor attempts to have the Queen restored to her human form but the hostage (in the form of a fly) he was hoping to exchange in order to achieve this is accidentally killed after Amy swatted it with a newspaper and the goldfish he picked up is not in fact the transmogrified Queen. The Commonwealth of Nations was mentioned as a contemporary institution.
The Emberverse series by S. M. Stirling
In the apocalyptic series that begins with Dies the Fire, some of the British royal family are evacuated to the Isle of Wight.

Queen Elizabeth II
The Queen fled to the Isle of Wight with the rest of the British Royal Family on the third day after The Change occurred. However, she died shortly thereafter in December 1998.
King Charles III the Mad
The real-life Charles III (the Prince of Wales at time of publication). He ascended the British throne following the death of his mother Elizabeth II in December 1998, Charles led the remnants of Britain through the early years after the Change. His knowledge of organic farming (which he had been experimenting with since the early 1980s) helped the survivors with their food problems. He later married an Icelandic refugee, who was popularly blamed for manipulating him. In his later years he went insane and refused to have new elections for parliament and instead ruled by royal decree, which eventually caused a rift between him and Nigel. After about a decade on the throne, he officially died in 2008 of a stroke but it was a common rumor that he was killed by his wife who wanted to assume power for herself and her infant son.
King William V the Great
The real-life Prince of Wales. He became the King of Great Britain and Emperor of the West following the death of his father and after defeating a coup by his stepmother. After the Change occurred in 1998, William went to serve in the military. Nigel saved his life in a battle with pirates during this service. He personally led a "crusade" against Moorish pirates off the Canary Islands and on his return was crowned Emperor of the West. Under his leadership the British Empire was reborn. He tried unsuccessfully to convince Nigel to return to Britain by promising him wealth, land, and title. He would serve as king from 2008 until his death in a fox-hunting accident in 2039.
Charles IV
Fictional son of William V. Served as King of Great Britain and Emperor of the West from 2039 until his death in 2066.
Elizabeth III
Daughter of Charles IV. Served as the Queen of Great Britain and Empress of the West from 2066 to 2098.
Futurama

In the episode "All the Presidents' Heads", an unnamed Queen of Great Britain, North America (also called 'West Britannia') and 'two parking spaces in Tokyo' reigns in the 31st century due to the Planet Express crew accidentally preventing the American Revolution whilst trying to prevent counterfeiting by Professor Farnsworth's ancestor, David Farnsworth. The Queen is descended from the Farnsworth family due to their elevation to a ducal family with its members providing consorts for the Royal Family.
The Gate of Worlds by Robert Silverberg

James the Valiant – the Black Death, much worse than in our history, so weakened Europe that the entire continent was conquered by the Ottoman Empire. In the 20th century, the freedom fighter James made use of a period of Ottoman instability, led a successful rebellion, liberated England after five centuries of Turkish rule and inaugurated a new Royal Dynasty. English people were happy and proud of James the Valiant's achievement – though the independent England was an impoverished country, of little account in the wider world.
The Great Mouse Detective

Queen Mousetoria (voiced by Eve Brenner) is the mouse queen of England who has been nearly deposed by the evil Professor Ratigan but is rescued by Basil of Baker Street and Dr. Dawson.
Professor Padraic Ratigan (voiced by Vincent Price) attempts to conquer England as a "supreme ruler of all Mousedom" with his toy robot that mimics the real Queen declaring it.
Headlong by Emlyn Williams

John II: The actor Jack Green (born John Albert Sandring), who is grandson of Prince Albert Victor via a secret morganatic marriage and made king after the royal family is killed in a dirigible accident during George V's Silver Jubilee in 1935. After delivering his first Christmas Speech, in which he called on the Government to undertake radical action to reduce unemployment and thus overstepped his role as a constitutional monarch, he is forced to abdicate.
William V: Originally William Millingham, is the private secretary of John II, and as the descendant of Queen Charlotte of Wurttemberg, becomes the new king after John's abdication.
John III: The son of William V and Anne, the Queen Consort. John III is his suggested regnal name, being only the ten-year-old Prince of Wales in the story.
Hearts of Iron IV

Edward VIII
In The New Order: Last Days of Europe, he was restored after the Axis Victory and reigns the reduced Kingdom of England.
Elizabeth II
In the same mod, she is the leader of the British Government in exile residing in Canada (represented in the British Isles by Her Majesty's Most Loyal Resistance) and recognized by the monarchies within the Organization of Free Nations.
Edward IX
Edward VIII's successor is Friedrich Josias, Prince of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, who was chosen as the highest placed person in the line of succession, who is clearly aligned with Germany and its interests.
Henry IX
In Kaiserreich: Legacy of the Weltkrieg, he can be crowned King over his older brother, Albert, if their eldest brother Edward VIII abdicates.
George VI
Henry's younger brother is Prince George, Duke of Kent in the same mod.
Carl-Eduard of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Charles III)
A German puppet king if the German Empire restores the monarchy in the British Isles.
Albert I
In Pax Britannica, he is still alive and can succeed his grandmother, Queen Victoria, as king of Britain.
Henry IX

In the 2017 TV series Henry IX, King Henry IX of the United Kingdom is played by Charles Edwards. After his older brother, John, died in a horse riding accident, Henry became heir apparent to the British throne, becoming King in 1992. After nearly twenty-five years on the throne, he experiences a midlife crisis (owing to his lack of agency both in becoming and being King, his unhappy marriage and a monotonous series of trivial public engagements) and intends to abdicate during his Silver Jubilee. Queen Katarina (played by Sally Phillips) stymies his plan by clandestinely leaking it to the press, wishing to remain Queen. After Alastair, the Prince of Wales, comes out as gay and creates a succession crisis (since no one other than the homophobic Duke of Cumberland would willingly become monarch), Henry IX retains the throne. However, almost immediately, his secret relationship with the royal florist is uncovered by the tabloid press.
Her Majesty's American by Steve White

Maurice I: The only son of William III and Mary II, he becomes king at the age of thirteen in 1702, born one year after the Glorious Revolution. His birth and reign ensures that British monarchs would concurrently hold the title of Stadtholder of the Dutch Republic.
William V: His reign saw the outbreak of the First American Rebellion in 1775 with rapprochement bringing about the creation of the Viceroyalty of North America in 1781.
Maurice II: Mentioned as being king sometime during the early-nineteenth century.
William VII: Adopts the titles Emperor of North America and Emperor of India following the Second American Rebellion and the Great Mutiny respectively.
Elizabeth IV: The namesake of a Regal Lines interstellar passenger liner.
House of Cards

In the British political satire To Play the King, the second book (and TV series) in the House of Cards trilogy by Michael Dobbs, an unnamed King takes the throne. Critical of the Conservative government's social policies, he goes up against the utterly ruthless and unscrupulous Prime Minister Francis Urquhart as an unofficial leader of the opposition but is ultimately undone and forced to abdicate. The novel diverges in many ways from the TV series and carries the suggestion that after abdicating the ex-King would go into politics and seek to be elected Prime Minister. At the end of To Play The King, the King's son is crowned and during The Final Cut is depicted performing monarchical duties.
Human Target

Unnamed Queen. Unaware of the machinations of her staff against her daughter, she travels from Sydney to New York to meet attend the gala and discovers the conspiracy. She has her son-in-law and Templeton arrested, although seems unsure about permitting her daughter to divorce and marry Sorrento. She is played by Patricia Drake.
Victoria, Princess of Wales. She is the heiress apparent to the throne and considered a spoiled black sheep within the family. Victoria wishes to divorce her husband, Prince Walter, and marry Tony Sorrento, a commoner. In retaliation, he conspires with royal fixer Templeton to have her assassinated during a state visit to New York City. She is played by Christina Cole.
Prince Walter, Victoria's husband. Upon discovering his wife wishes to divorce him, he conspires with royal fixer Templeton and her Protection Command bodyguards to allow her to be killed whilst attending a foundation gala in New York City, although the attempt is ultimately foiled.
Hyperdrive

Charles III, presumably the then-Prince of Wales
Harry I, son of Charles III
Queen Chenise, Harry's daughter
King Keith, Chenise's daughter and Harry's grandson
Hyperion Cantos by Dan Simmons

William XXIII of the Kingdom of Windsor-in-Exile
Also called "Sad King Billy"
King on Asquith, a planet traditionally held by his kingdom
Sells Asquith in order to settle on the planet Hyperion, where he intends to revive fine art, taking Martin Silenus with him.
If: A Jacobite Fantasy by Charles Petrie

James III of England and VIII of Scotland – The Jacobite rising of 1745, led by Charles Edward Stuart, succeeded in restoring the House of Stuart to the British throne. In February 1746, his father arrived in London to officially take the throne. In 1752, he granted clemency to the Hanoverian rebels. By 1926, the House of Hanover's usurpation of the throne was viewed as "an interlude in the national life, but it was one that will not have been without its purpose if it is regarded as a lesson upon the consequences of rebellion."
Charles III of England and Scotland: James III's eldest son. Charles III allied himself with Frederick II of Prussia and, together, they "towered over the other rulers of Europe like colossi" from 1766 until Frederick's death in 1786. During his reign, the colonies in British North America rebelled against Great Britain but a diplomatic solution was reached. Charles III was credited with saving the situation by his witty remark to George Washington, who went on to become one of Britain's greatest generals, and his colleagues: "Gentlemen, we have one thing in common: my family have no more cause to like the House of Commons than you have."
Henry IX of England and I of Scotland: James III's second son. As Duke of York, his patronage helped ensure the flourishing of literature and art in Britain and this policy continued after he came to the throne as Henry IX. After the French Revolution drove the deposed Electors of Hanover into exile in 1789, he gave them a "generous pension."
James IV of England and IX of Scotland, presumably a son of Henry IX and I.
James V of England and X of Scotland
James VI of England and XI of Scotland was the reigning monarch in 1926.
In the Cage Where Your Saviours Hide by Malcolm Mackay

In an alternate reality where the Darien scheme was successful, Scotland remained an independent country with its own colony of Caledonia in Central America. Kenneth IV was mentioned as the King of Scotland in 1905, conducting a royal visit to Caledonia during mounting calls for independence.
Infinite Worlds

William III of England (in the 12th rather than the 17th Century)
Unbroken Plantagenet Monarchs until the 19th Century.
In the GURPS role-playing game Infinite Worlds, in the year 1120, the White Ship carrying William the Aetheling, the heir of Henry I of England, did not hit a rock in the English Channel. William survived the voyage and eventually assumed the throne – becoming known as King William III of England. Neither the Empress Matilda nor Stephen of Blois had any claim on the throne. William's descendants constituted more than seven centuries of English monarchs, with the House of Plantagenet retaining unbroken power. Ultimately the "Anglo-French Empire" became a world-spanning power, achieving an Industrial Revolution much earlier. However, in 1902 unknown parties detonated a nuclear device, destroying the royal family.
Johnny English

King Pascal I of the United Kingdom (portrayed by John Malkovich), Sauvage is a French private prison entrepreneur who engineered his accession to the British throne in order to convert the entire United Kingdom into a giant prison facility.
Johnny English (portrayed by Rowan Atkinson), he was accidentally crowned king. Abdicating after one day in favour of Queen Elizabeth II, English exchanged the throne for a knighthood.
King Ralph

Wyndham Family, the ruling House of the United Kingdom in the film, who are all electrocuted to death in a photography accident.
Ralph I of the United Kingdom (portrayed by John Goodman) was an American lounge singer who came to the throne following the Wyndham family's demise. One of the Wyndham princes had an affair with an American woman, which resulted in the birth of a son, who was Ralph's father.
Cedric I of the United Kingdom (portrayed by Peter O'Toole) took power after Ralph I abdicated the throne.
The Last Man by Mary Shelley

Adrian, Earl of Windsor: In a post-apocalyptic 21st century, Britain is a republic with a Lord Protector as head of state where Adrian, the son of the last king and heir to the British throne, embraces republican principles.
The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen

Nan Bollen, a faerie version of Anne Boleyn.
Gloriana I, a combination of Elizabeth I, Edmund Spenser's The Faerie Queene and Michael Moorcock's Gloriana of Albion.
Jacob I, an alternate version of James VI and I.
Gloriana II, an alternate version of Elizabeth II.
Long Live The King by John Rowe

Queen Victoria II, the reigning monarch of the United Kingdom during the 1980s, and married to Prince Arthur. She is forced to abdicate as a result of leukaemia and consequent chemotherapy. She might be a stand-in for the real-life Elizabeth II, as both Edward VIII and George VI are mentioned as past monarchs.
King Richard IV, first son of Victoria II, and married to Queen Fiona Warwick. He became king after Victoria II abdicated, but was assassinated not long after along with his consort and parents by the Provisional IRA.
King George VII, second son of Victoria II, and married to Anne Kitchener. His first son is Prince David Arthur Rupert George, nicknamed Prince DARG.
Lord Darcy novels by Randall Garrett

John IV of the Anglo-French Empire
King in the Lord Darcy novels by Randall Garrett
Descendant of Richard I Plantagenet, who survived the siege of Chalus in 1199 in this series.
Arthur I
In the history of the same timeline Arthur I, Duke of Brittany, Richard I's nephew, got to be King and proved one of the greatest Kings of English history. His reign came to be considered a Golden Age, to the extent that later generations popular imagination confused him with King Arthur of heroic myth. A major achievement of Arthur's time was the beginning of systematic research and codification of magic, which would later become a central aspect of human civilization.
Marvel Comics

King Britain of Britain, though technically he rules the whole of Europe. He is king in the Earth X setting, and an alternate future version of Captain Britain.
Minions

King Bob the Minion
In 2015 animated film Minions, Bob the Minion briefly takes over the crown from Queen Elizabeth II in 1968 after accidentally crashing into the Sword in the Stone and pulling it free. He later abdicates the throne in favor of supervillain Scarlet.
Scarlet Overkill
She takes over the throne from Bob the Minion. After her defeat at the end of the film, Elizabeth II reclaims the throne.
The Moon Maid and Moon Men by Edgar Rice Burroughs
Published in the early 1920s, The Moon Maid and The Moon Men envisioned a twentieth century in which "The Great War" would have gone on uninterrupted, though with varying intensity, from 1914 and until 1967 – ending with the total victory of the Anglo-Saxon Powers, Britain and the US, and the complete defeat and surrender of all other powers. Britain and the US thereupon become co-rulers of the planet, London and Washington being the twin planetary capitals and the US President and British Monarch acting as co-rulers, and with the British-American domination of the world imposed by the International Peace Fleet, made up of airships. In the first decades of the 21st century, the world basks in peace, there seems no enemy and no threat anywhere, and pressure grows for complete disarmament and scrapping of the International Peace Fleet. It is the (unnamed) King of Britain who strongly resists this pressure, and due to him half of the Fleet and of the world's armament industries are retained. This is not enough to resist the invasion fleet of the wild Kalkars from the Moon, led by the renegade Earthman Orthis, which suddenly descends on the world in 2050, capturing London and Washington and ranging the world at will. But by the British King's foresight there was still a remnant of the Fleet in existence, which kills the renegade Orthis – facilitating humanity's eventual liberation from Kalkar domination, though only centuries later.
The Napoleon of Notting Hill

Auberon Quin in The Napoleon of Notting Hill by G. K. Chesterton. In this book the ruler of the United Kingdom is selected randomly from the "official class", which one character describes as "the sane and enduring democracy ... founded on the fact that all men are equally idiotic".
Nation by Terry Pratchett

After influenza kills the entire British royal family, Governor Fanshaw is the heir to the throne and is sought out in the South Pacific. His daughter Ermentrude Fanshaw ("Daphne") is his heir and succeeds him on the throne and becomes queen.
Old Harry's Game

Derek I
Deceased historian Edith Barrington (played by Annette Crosbie) is forced to write a biography of Satan as part of a deal to no longer be billeted with her ex-son-in-law Thomas Crimp, the most vile human ever to have lived. Whilst conducting research for the biography, Edith becomes frustrated with the many revelations that official recorded histories were wildly incorrect. One example is the existence of Derek I, a Tudor monarch forgotten by history. Satan's assistant Scumspawn (played by Robert Duncan) recalls the monarch as 'the mad, black, Catholic lesbian', personally believing that she was undone by her Catholicism.
The Palace

King James III
The previous ruler.
King Richard IV
Son of James III, played by Rupert Evans.
Prior to his coronation, his sister Princess Eleanor (played by Sophie Winkleman) attempted unsuccessfully to discredit him in order to claim the throne for herself, being exiled from court after questioning Richard's paternity.
Passport to Pimlico

Sébastien de Charolais
The descendant of Charles the Bold, the presumed last Duke of Burgundy, he is installed as the Duke of a revived Burgundy in post-Second World War Pimlico. After becoming a market for off-the-ration goods and being subsequently blockaded (albeit unsuccessfully), Burgundy is readmitted into the United Kingdom.
Pavane by Keith Roberts

Charles the Good
In an alternate reality where the assassination of Elizabeth I results in the suppression of Protestantism and the ascendancy of the Catholic Church as a European and world power by the twentieth century, Charles the Good is the King of England and the nominal ruler of the New World. In the story Corfe Gate, a regional rebellion led by Lady Eleanor breaks out during his reign.
The Peshawar Lancers by S. M. Stirling

Victoria II reigned from 1921 to 1942. Presumably the eldest surviving child of George V, she was hedonistic, intelligent and sexually liberal with most of what defined her reign being whitewashed out of history books. She died unmarried and without issue.
Albert I, the cousin of Victoria II and a former professor of Indo-European languages, reigned from 1942 to 1989.
Elizabeth II, reigned from 1989 to 2005. She is known as the 'Whig Empress' for pushing for the right for women to study at universities.
King-Emperor John II is the ruler of the British Empire (Angrezi Raj) in an alternate history set in 2025. He was the second son of Elizabeth II, his older brother Edward having predeceased him. He was killed when the Imperial air yacht Garuda was hijacked and heavily damaged by the captain, a radical Afrikaner nationalist, in collaboration with the Russian Empire.
Charles III, the son of John II. Reigned from 2025 onwards.
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides

King George II is a greedy ruler of England who employs Captain Hector Barbossa as a privateer and attempts to order Captain Jack Sparrow to guide an expedition to the Fountain of Youth before King Ferdinand of Spain locates it.
The Prince and the Pauper by Mark Twain

Henry VIII Tudor was the previous king of England whose obesity hastened his death after the war.
Edward VI Tudor is the young prince of Wales who trades places with Thomas Canty, the young pauper, before he is proclaimed to be the new and rightful king of England.
The Puppet Masters
The world is invaded by space parasites, capable of attaching themselves to the body of a human being and completely controlling him or her. The President of the US implements a policy of ordering all Americans to walk naked, as the only way of ensuring they are not controlled by the invaders. The (unnamed) King of Britain wants to follow suit, but is prevented by the strong objections of the Archbishop of Canterbury, leaving Britain in danger of being taken over.
Red, White & Royal Blue
2019 novel by Casey McQuiston

Queen Mary, the current reigning monarch of the United Kingdom and head of the royal house Mountchristen-Windsor.
Catherine, Princess of Wales. The only daughter of Queen Mary and heir apparent to the throne. She holds a Doctorate in English Literature from Oxford University. Was married to famous film and stage actor Arthur Fox, who played James Bond in the 1980s and died from cancer.
Prince Philip, the oldest child of Catherine and second in line of succession.
Princess Beatrice, the older sister of Henry and the younger sister of Philip. She is a recovering cocaine addict, and is third in line of succession.
Prince Henry, the youngest of Princess Catherine's children nicknamed "the Prince of England's Hearts". He was educated at Eton College and like his mother studied English Literature at Oxford University. Henry is gay, and is forcibly outed when emails showing his romantic relationship with Alex Claremont-Diaz, the son of US President Ellen Claremont, is made public by the press. He is fourth in line of succession.
2023 film adaptation by Matthew Lopez

King James III, the current reigning monarch of the United Kingdom and head of the royal house Hanover-Stuart. He is portrayed by Stephen Fry.
Princess Catherine, Duchess of Edinburgh. The only daughter of King James III and the heir apparent to the throne. Her character background is the same as in the novel.
Prince Philip, the oldest child of Catherine and second in line of succession. He is portrayed by Thomas Flynn.
Princess Martha, the wife of Prince Phillip. Formerly styled as Lady Martha Fitzroy, she comes from British nobility. She is portrayed by Bridget Benstead.
Princess Beatrice, the third in line of succession. Her character background remains the same as in the novel. She is portrayed by Ellie Bamber.
Prince Henry, the fourth in line of succession. His character background remains the same as in the novel. In the film he is played by Nicholas Galitzine.
Revolting People

Samuel I
While in route to a ball to convince George III to liberalize the governance of the Thirteen Colonies and thus avert the American Revolution, Baltimore shopkeeper Samuel Oliphant (portrayed by Jay Tarses) dreams that he has been appointed the King of Great Britain by popular demand, Ireland and the British Empire 'especially America', acting as an absolutist despot. Samuel's dream ends when his firebrand daughter Mary leads a revolution against him.
The Royals

King Simon Henstridge (portrayed by Vincent Regan) dies in Season 1.
Prince Cyrus Henstridge, Duke of York (portrayed by Jake Maskall) briefly succeeded Simon after his son, Robert, is thought to have been killed in a plane crash and his twin children Prince Liam and Princess Eleanor were deemed illegitimate.
King Robert Henstridge (portrayed by Max Brown) succeeded his father after revealing himself to be alive.
Shadowrun

King Charles III
King George VI
King George VII
Queen Caroline
Sliders

In the parallel universe featured in the Sliders episode "The Prince of Wails" in which Great Britain won the American Revolutionary War, King Thomas was the reigning monarch of the British Empire until he was killed during the war with France in 1995.
Harold III (the uncrowned 'Prince of the Americas' and 'heir to the British throne') succeeded his father Thomas in 1995. He had been targeted in a plot involving a smear campaign and an assassination attempt by the Sheriff of San Francisco (that reality's Maximilian Arturo) to seize the Crown for himself. After being briefly kidnapped by the revolutionary Oakland Raiders, he is made aware of the Sheriff's deception and the true condition of the British States of America. He joins forces with the Raiders and the Sliders to denounce the Sheriff and introduce democracy via the implementation of a 'Second Magna Carta' (a version of the United States Constitution written from memory by the Sliders).
The Tales of Alvin Maker by Orson Scott Card

As a result of the continued existence of the Commonwealth of England, the exiled House of Stuart establishes the Crown Colonies, a monarchy on the American Eastern seaboard co-existing with a New England Republic and a smaller United States.
The Time Ships by Stephen Baxter

Egbert I of the United Kingdom
King in The Time Ships by Stephen Baxter, a sequel to The Time Machine by H. G. Wells.
Note: The novel's protagonist, visiting an alternate version of the Great War, is surprised to discover that the King is "a skinny chap called Egbert", apparently a distant cousin of the Royal Family who was the most senior survivor of massive German bombing raids early in the conflict.
Traumschiff Surprise – Periode 1

Lord William the Last is an arrogant monarch in 14th century Great Britain that is encountered by the protagonists when they travel through time. He tries to marry Queen Metapha and burn Rock and the crew of the Surprise at the stake.
The Virgin & the Wheels

David I of the United Kingdom and North America
King in The Virgin & The Wheels by L. Sprague de Camp.
His birthday celebrated in New York City, all streets festooned with Union Jacks. New Yorkers regard him fondly as "Our King" and see nothing strange about being under British rule into the mid-20th century. The day's paper told of "His Majesty's visit to a soap factory, where he showed a keen interest in the technical details" and of the launch of the cruise ship Queen Victoria.
V for Vendetta

Queen Zara of the United Kingdom
Queen in V for Vendetta.
Following a nuclear war in the 1980s, the crown falls to Zara, a 16-year-old queen who serves as a puppet monarch for Adam Susan and his fascist Norsefire party.
Yellow Dog by Martin Amis

Henry IX
Richard IV, mentioned as being the father of Henry IX


=== The United States ===
American Royals by Katharine McGee

George I, the historic George Washington who was made the first king, rather than the first president.
King Jeff, who replaced male-preference primogeniture with absolute primogeniture.
George IV
Queen Beatrice, one of the main characters of the novels.
Assassin's Creed

George Washington in Assassin's Creed III. George Washington is corrupted by an Apple of Eden, turns the Thirteen Colonies into the United Kingdom of America and dubs himself King.
Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman
In an alternate timeline accidentally created by Clark Kent, Lois Lane and H. G. Wells in the episode "Soul Mates", Tempus was the King of America in 1996.
Sliders

In the parallel universe featured in the Sliders episode "The Prince of Tides" in which the United States became a constitutional monarchy, Thomas Jefferson was crowned as the first King of the United States in 1789. His direct descendants continued to reign more than two centuries later. The reigning monarch King Thomas and his sons Benjamin and Tyler were killed in a house fire in 1997, which was later determined to be arson.
Star-Spangled Crown by Charles A. Coulombe

King James IV of the United States
Born Hans-Josef II of Lichtenburg
Conferred authority in the wake of a military coup whose leaders reconstitute the United States as a constitutional monarchy.
Formally "James IV, King of the United States and of their Possessions, Grand Duke of Lichtenberg"


== V ==


=== Vietnam ===
Hearts of Iron IV

Emperor Bảo Đại
In The New Order: Last Days of Europe, he is the puppet Emperor of Vietnam and holds no power of his own, acting as a tool for the Empire of Japan's purposes.


== See also ==
List of monarchs of fictional countries
List of fictional politicians
List of fictional prime ministers of the United Kingdom
List of fictional nobility
List of fictional political parties
Lists of fictional presidents of the United States
List of fictional princes
List of fictional princesses
List of fictional dictators


== References ==