Mihrimah Sultan (Ottoman Turkish: مهرماہ سلطان; 10 June 1812 – 3 July 1838) was an Ottoman princess, the daughter of Sultan Mahmud II, and his consort Hoşyar Kadın. She was the half-sister of Sultans Abdulmejid I and Abdulaziz.


== Early life ==
Mihrimah Sultan was born on 10, 12 or 29 June 1812 in the Topkapı Palace. Her father was Sultan Mahmud II, and her mother was Hoşyar Kadın, She had a younger full sister, Zeynep Sultan, three years younger than her and dead in infancy. 
Before the birth of Mihrimah, Mahmud had two children the same year, Şehzade Bayezid and Şah Sultan. The sultan commemorated the births of his three children together. 


== Marriage ==
When time came to get her a husband, her mother resolved that she should make her choice. Her mother showed her the portraits of several young men, and she fixed upon Said Mehmed Pasha. Upon the order of Mahmud, she was betrothed to the Admiral of the Fleet Mehmed Said Pasha in 1835. A dowry was prepared within a year.
Julia Pardoe reports an incident that occurred on the occasion of Mihrimah's wedding. In fact, at the time of composing her dowry, the palace informed Mahmud that there were no more imperial jewels for the princess, because Saliha Sultan, Mihrimah's half-sister who had married the year before, had demanded them all for her and not had ever given him back. Besides, she never wore them, because she was too proud to lead a worldly life. Mahmud proposed to sell them, but she replied that no one would dare to buy the jewels of a princess. Mahmud then offered to buy them himself, and Saliha was forced to accept.
The marriage took place on 28 April 1836 in the Beşiktaş Waterfront Palace, when Mihrimah was twenty four years old. After the marriage was completed, 15,000 kuruş were conceded to Mihrimah Sultan. Grand Vizier Mahmud Rauf Pasha and Şeyhülislam Asim Efendi were conceded 1000 kuruş. The pashas were conceded 500 Kuruş. Damat Gürcü Halil Rifat Pasha, the husband of her half-sister Saliha also conceded some cents. The dowry of Mihrimah Sultan was prepared in Serasker.
The wedding shows for Mihrimah Sultan were held in the vicinity of Dolmabahçe like those of Saliha Sultan. These entertainments lasted for days. Finally, an enormous bride regiment was organized and Mihrimah Sultan was sent to her palace. The marriage was consummated on 9 May 1836 in the Bebek Palace. At the wedding of Mihrimah Sultan, where tremendous lighting shows were held and the people watched with great enthusiasm and admiration.
Shortly after his marriage to Mihrimah, Said Pasha incurred her father's displeasure and had been exiled to the provinces, much to his wife's and mother-in-law's distress. At this time, her mother had sufficient influence to petition Mahmud directly to pardon her son-in-law, and did so in a letter. She followed this up with two letters of thanks, one when Mahmud granted her request, and ordered Said Pasha brought back to Istanbul, the other when he actually arrived.
The couple had one son, Sultanzade Mehmed Abdullah Bey, who was born and died on 3 July 1838.


== Death ==
Mihrimah Sultan died in childbirth on 3 July 1838. Her health was already delicate because she suffered from tuberculosis, which was raging in Istanbul in the nineteenth century,  she was buried in the mausoleum of her grandmother in Fatih, Istanbul. Her only son died with her.
It was said that Mihrimah loved her father so much, that she once wished not to be alive the day he died. Her wish was fulfilled, as she died before Mahmud. Mahmud was deeply saddened by her death. He died the following year, in 1839. After her death, her father commissioned a fountain named Sultan Mahmud Fountain beside Nişancılar Mosque in Eyüp in the memory of his daughter.
Mihrimah was also immensely loved by her mother Hoşyar Kadın, who after her death declared that "my last joy died with my daughter".


== Issue ==
Together with Mehmed Said Pasha Mihrimah had one son: 

Sultanzade Mehmed Abdullah Bey (3 July 1838 – 3 July 1838). Stillbirth or died after few hours. His mother died give birth him.


== See also ==
List of Ottoman princesses


== Ancestry ==


== References ==


== Sources ==
Hanim, Melek (1872). Thirty years in the harem: or, The autobiography of Melek-Hanum, wife of H.H. Kibrizli-Mehemet-Pasha.
Uluçay, Mustafa Çağatay (2011). Padişahların kadınları ve kızları. Ankara, Ötüken.
Sakaoğlu, Necdet (2008). Bu mülkün kadın sultanları: Vâlide sultanlar, hâtunlar, hasekiler, kadınefendiler, sultanefendiler. Oğlak Yayıncılık. ISBN 978-9-753-29623-6.
Sunay, Serap (2017). Sûr-ı Hümayun" Defterine Göre 19. Yüzyıl Saray Düğünlerine Dair Bir Değerlendirme.