The Oilliphéist (Irish: ollphéist, from Irish  oll 'great' and  péist 'worm, fabulous beast, monster, reptile') is a sea serpent or dragon-like monster in Irish mythology and folklore.
These monsters were believed to inhabit many lakes and rivers in Ireland and there are many legends of saints and heroes fighting them. In one story, an Oilliphéist cuts the route of the River Shannon when it hears that Saint Patrick has come to drive out it and its kind. In a comic addition to the story, the monster swallows a drunken piper named Ó Ruairc (O'Rourke). The piper is either unaware of his predicament or is completely unperturbed and continues to play inside the Oilliphéist's stomach. The monster becomes so annoyed with Ó Ruairc's music that it coughs him up and spits him out. It is believed by Chris Cairney that this story and one involving Caoránach helped influence and inspire the legend of the Loch Ness Monster.
Other stories of the Oilliphéist exist. One has a girl named Sionnan, grand daughter of Manannán mac Lir, angered the Salmon of Knowledge by throwing stones at it. In revenge the fish summons and asks an Oilliphéist to attack the girl which it does and ultimately ends up killing her.


== Caoránach ==
In Irish folklore, Caoránach (sometimes Caol) was an Oilliphéist and said to be the mother of demons who was banished by Saint Patrick to Lough Dearg in Donegal, Ulster.
According to earlier legends, Fionn mac Cumhaill and the Fianna are asked to slay a Hag in the Lough Dearg region. The Hag is shot and killed from far away, and her body is lost as a result. When the Fianna find her corpse, they are warned to not break its thigh bone lest a dangerous monster be released.
A man named Conan breaks the bone nevertheless, and releases a small hairy worm. The worm, named Caoránach, quickly grows into a large monster which attempts to eat all the cattle in the land. The people of Ulster blame Conan for the deaths of their cattle. Enraged, Conan stabs the monster from within its mouth. Lough Dearg is named after its red rocks, which are said to have been dyed by Caoránach's blood.
In a more Christianised version of the story, Saint Patrick slays the monster after being told about it. Its blood dyes the lake red and in some tales Saint Patrick declares the lake should be called Lough Dearg as a result. In some variants of the tale, Saint Patrick fails to kill the monster, and it lives on in Lough Dearg to this day as a result.


== See also ==
Muirdris
Each-uisge


== References ==


== External links ==
O'Nolan, Kevin, ed. (1982). Eochair, a king's son in Ireland (in Irish). Comhairle Bhéaloideas Éireann, University College. ISBN 978-0-906426-08-1.
竹原威滋; 丸山顯徳, eds. (1998). 世界の龍の話 [Story of the dragon of the world] (in Japanese). 三弥井書店. ISBN 978-4-8382-9043-7.