Queen Jangsun (Korean: 장순왕후; Hanja: 章順王后; 3 March 1445 – 14 January 1462), of the Cheongju Han clan, or known as Crown Princess Consort Jangsun (Korean: 장순빈) during her lifetime, was the first wife of Yejong of Joseon.


== Biography ==


=== Early life ===
Han Naeng-yi was born on 3 March 1445 into the Cheongju Han clan to Han Myŏnghoe and his wife, Lady Min of the Yeoheung Min clan. She was the third child of seven children. Her mother was a cousin of Queen Jeongsun's mother, and her maternal grandfather was also the maternal granduncle of the queen; making her and the Queen be second cousins. Queen Jeonghyeon was her first twice removed as her great-grandmother was her paternal grandaunt. Her younger sister, Han Song-yi, would eventually become the future Queen consort of Joseon.


=== Life as crown princess ===
At the age of 15, Lady Han was chosen to be the wife and Crown Princess Consort of King Yejong, known then as Yi Hwang, Grand Prince Haeyang, in 1460. She is said to have been favored by her father-in-law King Sejo for her quiet character and beautiful appearance. On 31 December 1461, 30 November 1461 in the lunar calendar, she gave birth to Wonson (Yejong's eldest son, Grand Prince Inseong).


== Death ==
The Crown Princess died fourteen days later in her quarters after battling postpartum sickness at the age of 16.
King Sejo was saddened by the death of his daughter-in-law, who he considered his favorite. She was called from Princess Jangsun to Crown Princess Jangsun.
For her posthumous title, "Jang" (장; 章) was for being gentle, generous, and beautiful. "Sun" (순; 順) was for  being docile and self-benevolent; becoming Crown Princess Jangsun (장순빈; 章順嬪). When her brother-in-law and step son-in-law, King Seongjong, ascended the throne, her posthumous title changed to Queen Jangsun (장순왕후; 章順王后).
Because she was posthumously honored as Queen, her mother was given the royal title of "Internal Princess Consort Hwangryeo" (황려부부인; 黃驪府夫人), and her father was granted the royal title of "Internal Prince Sangdang" (상당부원군; 上黨府院君). These royal titles were kept the same when Han Song-yi became Queen as well.
Her tomb is Gongneung located in Samneung, Bongilcheon-ri, Jojo-eup, Paju, Gyeonggi Province. It is said that she was given a ritual worthy rite and was an example for future queens to follow.
Her only son, Grand Prince Inseong, died two years later but a son, Yi Ong (서성부정 이옹; 1487–1510), from Yi Jaeng, Prince Hoewon (회원군 이쟁), who was also an adoptive son of Yi Jun, Prince Gwiseong (귀성군 이준) and Princess Consort Cheonan, a younger sister of Queen Ansun, and another son, Yi Seok, Prince Jeokseong (적성군 이석; 1484–1539), from a royal relative were posthumously made his adopted children to continue his line.


== Aftermath ==
A year after the crown princess' death, three girls from the Yangban class were brought in as concubines for the king. With this, the King decided to choose one from the three to be elevated to Queenship. Royal Consort Suk-ui from the Cheongju Han clan (later Queen Ansun) was soon chosen and became Queen consort of Joseon in 1463. The new Queen was also a third cousin of the late crown princess.
At 10 years old, Han Song-yi, the Crown Princess' younger sister, was arranged to marry the 9 year old Yi Hyeol, Grand Prince Jalsan; Crown Prince Uigyeong's and Crown Princess Consort Su's youngest son, on 12 January 1467. As the grand prince's wife, her royal title became "Princess Consort Cheonan" (천안군부인).
But with King Yejong dying in 1470, and with the influence of the Cheongju Han clan from Han Myŏnghoe and Han Hwak (Queen Dowager Insu's father), the newly turned Queen Dowager Inhye's sons were considered ineligible. Thus passing the throne to Queen Dowager Insu's son, Grand Prince Jalsan, that same year; which then changed her younger sister's status from princess consort to queen consort.
But the young Queen unfortunately faced the same fate as her older sister and died from an unknown illness at the age of 17 on 9 May 1474.
King Seongjong gave the posthumous title of using "Gong" (공; 恭) on praising and docilely serving her in-law's, and used "Hye" (혜; 惠) for her generosity, tenderness, and kindness; becoming Queen Gonghye (공혜왕후; 恭惠王后).


== Family ==

Father − Han Myŏnghoe (한명회; 26 November 1415 – 28 November 1487)
Mother − Internal Princess Consort Hwangryeo of the Yeoheung Min clan (황려부부인 여흥 민씨; 黃驪府夫人 驪興 閔氏; 1414–1479)
Siblings
Older sister − Lady Han of the Cheongju Han clan (청주 한씨; 淸州 韓氏; 1438–?)
Older sister − Lady Han of the Cheongju Han clan (청주 한씨; 淸州 韓氏; 1442–?)
Younger brother - Han Po (한보; 韓堡; 1447–1522)
Younger sister - Queen Gonghye of the Cheongju Han clan (공혜왕후 한씨; 8 November 1456 – 30 April 1474)
Brother-in-law - Yi Hyeol, King Seongjong (조선 성종; 20 August 1457 – 20 January 1494)
Younger brother - Han Ch'ŏl (한철; 韓鐵; 1460–?)
Younger sister - Lady Han of the Cheongju Han clan (청주 한씨; 淸州 韓氏; 1465–1525)
Husband
Yi Hwang, King Yejong (조선 예종; 14 January 1450 – 31 April 1469)
Children
Son - Yi Pun, Grand Prince Insŏng (인성대군 이분; 仁城大君 李糞; 31 December 1461 – 4 December 1463)


== See also ==
Yejong of Joseon
Queen Ansun
Queen Gonghye
Han Myŏnghoe


== References ==


== External links ==
Queen Jangsun in Encyclopedia of Korean Culture. (in Korean).
Queen Jangsun in The Dong-A Ilbo. (in Korean).