Abbadi or Abbadids or Ibad (Arabic : بنو عباد) is an Arab Muslim dynasty and one of the biggest Bedouin tribes in Jordan. Abbadi is the second most common surname in Jordan. They are descended from "Qahtan" (Arabic : قحطانيون)    Many researchers believe that Prophet Shuaib is from the same tribe. Despite the fact that they have the largest presence in Jordan (estimated at half a million people). However, due to early Islamic conquests, the Abbadi dynasty expanded extensively throughout numerous Arab countries, including Egypt, several North African countries, and eventually Spain or Andalusia. In which three generations of Abbadi khilafa ruled there and later established the Kingdom of Seville in Andalusia.


== Abbadi in Spain ==
After the end of the Umayyad Caliphate rule in Andalusia in 1031 AD, it was the beginning of a new phase known in Andalusian history as "The Kings of the Taifas", In this difficult time people in Seville and the Andalusian West trusted Abu al-Qasim Muhammad ibn Abbad, or Abbad I, a judge from the Abbad tribe to help them overcome this crisis. He was well known for his wit, knowledge, and objectivity. Abu al-Qasim Muhammad ibn Abbad became the king of Seville during the years of 1023 and 1042. Later on, he was succeeded by his son Al-Mu'tadid Ibn Abbad in 1042, or Abbad II. He made Seville the most powerful kingdom in southern Spain. Then he was succeeded in 1069 by the third and last of the Abbadis, Al-Mutam'd ibn Abbad, or Abbad III, he was a great poet and lover of arts and Arabic Islamic architecture. Ibn al-Abar described al-Mu’tamid as: “He was one of the virtuous kings, the brave but wise, generous and trustworthy". His kingdom grew to include Seville, Cordoba, the historic caliphate territories, Green Island, and Murcia.[1] Following the fall of Andalusia and the Islamic Caliphate, the Abbadi dynasty relocated in a number of countries along the way back from Andalusia to their homeland in the Arab Levant, and especially Jordan, while those who stayed in Spain were forcibly converted to Christianity. As a result, the Abbadi dynasty can be found as surnames in a variety of countries Including North Africa, Egypt, Iraq and more.


== Meaning of Abbadi in Arabic ==
The word Abbadi عّباديّ is the exaggerated form of the word ْعَبّاد which means a devoted worshiper of God, or a person who worships God continuously. The surname can be found nowadays written as العبادي or Al Abbadi.


== Abbadi in Jordan ==
The Abaddi dynasty has a stronghold in Jordan, particularly in central Jordan and its capital Amman, as well as the governorates of Balqa, Salt, Jerash, Ajloun, Irbid, Mafraq, Zarqa, Madaba, and Karak. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the tribe fought in bloody tribal battles with other Jordanian tribes, which resulted in either control of more lands or displacement as a result of these wars. Jordanian poets sung about the tribe's power and the spread of its territory, "Abbad from Stream to Stream ," Meaning that their lands extend from the Zarqa River to Al Bahath stream. This denotes the size of their monastery as well as their power.
Historian Rox Bin Zaid Al-Azizi, in his book, A Landmark for Jordanian Heritage, noted that the Abbadi tribe is classified into two main groupings : Al-Jarūmiyyah and the Jabūriyyah.
Al-Jarūmiyyah includes Abbadi clans between the Zarqa torrent to the Wadi Shuaib stream, which is Al-Ardah area, Ayra, Al-Bireh, Yarqa, Wadi Shuaib, Jalad, Al-Rumaymin, and parts of the Jordan Valley, such as Maadi, the Jordan Valley, Damia Valley, Al-Malaha, and part of the Deir Alla area.
Al-Jabūriyyah includes Abbadi clans between the torrent of Wadi Shuaib to Wadi Al-Shita’, Marj Al-Hamam, Al-Bahat, Bayader, Wadi Al-Seer, Wadi Al-Seer, Al-Bassa, Iraq Al-Amir, Wadi Al-Shita’, Abu Al-Sus, Badr Al-Jadida, Mahes, Bilal, Umm Al-Aswad, Dabouq, Al-Rabahiya, and parts of Khalda.
The Al-Jarūmiyyah are divided into several clans:

Al-Hajjah
Al-Harith
Al-Khatalayn
Al-Ramadinah
Islamism
Al-Sanabara
Al-Ma'adat
Al-Ghanayem
Al-Manaseer
Al-Na’imat
Al-Yazijis.
The Al-Jabūriyyah are also divided into several clans:

Al-Salihin.
Al-Zayyat
Al-Taawiya
Al-Alaween
Al-Alwan
Al-Awamrah
Al-Mahasna
Al-Rahamna
Al-Jira
Al-Fiqhah


== Queen Elizabeth Fake Links To both Prophet Muhammad & Al-Mutam'd ibn Abbad ==
After the death of Queen Elizabeth II, numerous false rumors started to circulate regarding her lineage to Prophet Muhammad through Al-Mutam'd ibn Abbad, the ruler of Seville. However, These false claims were made up by some Spanish historians in the past, and became public a few years ago by various important newspapers and public figures, including the Daily Mail.
The Daily Mail wrongly stated that Zaida was the daughter of Al-Mutam'd ibn Abbad and a direct descendant of Prophet Muhammad. The truth, however, is that Al-Mutam'd ibn Abbad did not have a daughter named Zaida; rather, Zaida was the wife of his son, known as "Al-Ma'mun," the ruler of Cordoba. Zaida, whose real name is Isabel, was a young Castilian maid that his son married.
After the end of the Islamic era in Spain, She managed to flee and wed Alfonso VI, King of Castile, before later converting to Christianity or, to be more specific, reverting to her previous faith.


== People with this surname ==
Notable people include:

Adi ibn Zayd. عدي بن زيد العبادي A 6th-century pre-Islamic poet.
Abū ʿĀṣim Al-ʿAbbādī (d. 1066)
Ibn Qāsim al-ʻAbbādī (d. 1585)
Marouf al-Bakhit Al Abbadi (born 1947), Prime Minister of Jordan
Hani Abbadi (died 2014), Jordanian politician
Mamdouh Al Abbadi (born 1943) Jordanian Minister of Health
Juma Abdullah Al Abbadi Jordanian diplomat
Abd Al Salam Al Abbadi Minister of Awqaf Islamic Affairs and Holy Places in Jordan
Hussein AlShebli Al Abbadi Secretary General of Jordan Hashemite Charity Organization
Haider al-Abadi (born 1952) Prime Minister of Iraq
Shirin Ebadi (born 1947) Nobel Peace Prize winner 
Ilyas Abbadi (born 1992), Algerian boxer
Mohammad Khtoom Al-Abadi (born 1950), Jordanian actor
Mostafa El-Abbadi Egyptian historian (1928–2017)
Amr El Abbadi Egyptian computer scientist (born 1958)


== References ==