Dolgiye Borody (Russian: Долгие Бороды or Long Beards) also known as other names "Valdai" and "Uzhin" is a residence of the president of the Russian Federation and is located in the Novgorod Oblast, 20 kilometers from the city of Valdai, near the village of Dolgiye Borody.


== Buildings ==
The official name of the residence is the "Uzhin Holiday House", named after the lake. There is a neighboring village of the same name, Dolgiye Borody. In 1992, the pioneer camp "Kosmos" and the boarding house "Lazurny bank", both previously next to the residence, were demolished. By 2000, the territory of the residence occupied 930 hectares.


== History ==
In 1934, construction of Object 201 (as the official documents called this residence) began for Stalin. However, Stalin was only here once in 1939 as he disliked the remoteness and quietness of the surroundings. In 1940, three buildings were constructed on the shores of Lake Uzhin: "Dacha No. 1" and "Dacha No. 2" were connected to a single complex, while the building for the protection of "Dacha No. 3" is closer to the rural village of Dolgiye Borody. Architecturally, the dachas were similar to Stalin's dacha in Volyn. 
During most of the Soviet era, the sanatorium of the Central Committee of the CPSU was located within the territory of the current residence, and several notable events occured during this time. In August 1948, Andrei Zhdanov died here while on vacation. His daughter Yuri and Stalin's daughter Svetlana Alliluyeva were also married here. In addition, the residence was used as a resting place for Nikita Khrushchev, Nikolai Ryzhkov and other Soviet officials. In the 1980s the residence was expanded and a new complex was built. The first Russian president, Boris Yeltsin, also used to rest and fish here. Since 2000, Vladimir Putin also visits this residence.
Currently, this residence is officially known as the Federal State Budgetary Institution of the Directorate of the President of the Russian Federation "The Holiday House Valdai", designed for 320 seats. In 2007–2010, "Dachas No. 1-3" were reconstructed in consistence with their historical appearances. The Congress Center was also built on the territory of the complex. The main building of the residence has an assembly hall, where the first Valdai Discussion Club was held.
According to Natalya Vetlitskaya, a private concert was held here in the winter of 2008 with the support of Pyotr Shaboltai, who was the director of the State Kremlin Palace.


== Notes ==


== References ==