1986 (MCMLXXXVI) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Gregorian calendar, the 1986th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 986th  year of the 2nd millennium, the 86th  year of the 20th century, and the  7th   year of the 1980s decade.  
The year 1986 was designated as the International Year of Peace by the United Nations.


== Events ==


=== January ===
January 1
Aruba gains increased autonomy from the Netherlands by separating from the Netherlands Antilles.
Spain and Portugal enter the European Community, which becomes the European Union in 1993.
January 11 – The Gateway Bridge in Brisbane, Australia, at this time the world's longest prestressed concrete free-cantilever bridge, is opened.
January 13–24 – South Yemen Civil War.
January 20 – The United Kingdom and France announce plans to construct the Channel Tunnel.
January 21 – Conservative protestors attacked a mock shanty town that had been erected on the Green at Dartmouth College as part of anti-apartheid protests.
January 24 – The Voyager 2 space probe makes its first encounter with Uranus.
January 25 – Yoweri Museveni's National Resistance Army Rebel group takes over Uganda after leading a five-year guerrilla war in which up to half a million people are believed to have been killed. They will later use January 26 as the official date to avoid a coincidence of dates with Dictator Idi Amin's 1971 coup.
January 28 – Space Shuttle Challenger disaster – STS-51-L: Space Shuttle Challenger disintegrates 73 seconds after launch from the United States, killing the crew of seven astronauts, including schoolteacher Christa McAuliffe.
January 29 – Yoweri Museveni is sworn in as President of Uganda.


=== February ===
February 3 – Pixar is founded by John Lasseter along with Steve Jobs.
February 7
Anti-Duvalier protest movement: President Jean-Claude Duvalier ("Baby Doc") flees Haiti, ending 28 years of family rule.
The snap presidential election in the Philippines earlier announced by President Ferdinand Marcos is held amidst controversy, that paves the way for a chain of protests, culminating in the People Power Revolution.
February 8 – Hinton train collision: A Canadian National train heading westbound collides with a Via Rail train in Hinton, Alberta; 23 people are killed and 71 injured in the accident.
February 9 – Halley's Comet reaches its perihelion, the closest point to the Sun, during its second visit to the Solar System in the 20th century (the first was in 1910).
February 10 – The Maxi Trial (Italian: Maxiprocesso) begins in the bunker room of the Ucciardone prison (Palermo). It will be the largest trial against the Sicilian Mafia.
February 11 – Human rights activist Natan Sharansky is released by Soviet authorities and leaves the country for Israel.
February 15 – The Beechcraft Starship makes its maiden flight.
February 16
The Soviet liner MS Mikhail Lermontov sinks in the Marlborough Sounds, New Zealand.
Ouadi Doum air raid: The French Air Force raids the Libyan Ouadi Doum airbase in northern Chad.
Mário Soares wins the second round of the Portuguese presidential election.
February 17 – The Single European Act is signed.
February 19
The Soviet Union launches the Mir space station.
The United States Senate approves a treaty outlawing genocide.
February 22 – The People Power Revolution begins in the Philippines to remove President Ferdinand Marcos from office.
February 25
The 27th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union opens in Moscow. The General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev introduces the keywords of his mandate to the audience: Glasnost and Perestroika.
People Power Revolution: President Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines is ousted from power and goes into exile in Hawaii after 20 years of dictatorial rule; Corazon Aquino becomes the first Filipino woman president and forms an interim government with Salvador Laurel becoming her Vice-president and Prime Minister.
A three-day riot begins in Cairo, Egypt when around 25,000 conscripts of the Central Security Forces (CSF), staged protests in and around the city. Three luxury hotels, several nightclubs, restaurants and cars were looted and burned in the tourist districts near the Pyramids over several days. The riot became known as the Egyptian Conscripts Riot. At least 25 people died during the first day in Cairo, and an estimated 8,000 people, mostly conscripts in regions outside the city, were killed in total.
February 27 – The United States Senate allows its debates to be televised on a trial basis.
February 28 – Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme is shot to death on his way home from the cinema in Stockholm, Sweden.


=== March ===
March 1 – Olof Palme's deputy Ingvar Carlsson becomes acting Prime Minister of Sweden. He is elected Prime Minister by the Swedish Riksdag on March 15.
March 3 – The first paper is published describing the atomic force microscope invented the previous year by Gerd Binnig, Calvin Quate and Christopher Berger.
March 8 – The Japanese Suisei probe flies by Halley's Comet, studying its UV hydrogen corona and solar wind.
March 9 – United States Navy divers find the largely intact but heavily damaged crew compartment of the Space Shuttle Challenger; the bodies of all seven astronauts are still inside.
March 13
In a Black Sea incident, American cruiser USS Yorktown and the destroyer USS Caron, claiming the right of innocent passage, enter the Soviet territorial waters near the southern Crimean Peninsula.
Microsoft Corporation holds its initial public offering of stock shares.
March 15 – Hotel New World collapses, 33 killed and 17 rescued from rubble.
March 24 – The 58th Academy Awards are held in Los Angeles, with Out of Africa winning Best Picture.
March 26 – An article in The New York Times charges that Kurt Waldheim, former United Nations Secretary-General and candidate for president of Austria, may have been involved in Nazi war crimes during World War II.
March 27 – Russell Street Bombing: A car bomb explodes at Russell Street Police Headquarters in Russell Street, Melbourne, killing a woman constable, the first Australian policewoman to be killed in the line of duty.
March 31 – Mexicana Flight 940 crashes near Maravatío, Mexico, killing 167.


=== April ===
April – The government of Ivory Coast requests international diplomatic use of the French form of its name, Côte d'Ivoire.
April 1 – Sector Kanda: Communist Party of Nepal (Mashal) cadres attack a number of police stations in Kathmandu, seeking to incite a popular rebellion.
April 2 – A bomb explodes on a Trans World Airlines flight from Rome to Athens, killing 4 people.
April 5 – 1986 Berlin discotheque bombing: The West Berlin discothèque La Belle, a known hangout for United States soldiers, is bombed, killing three and injuring 230; Libya is held responsible.
April 11 – The infamous FBI shootout in Miami results in the death of two FBI agents and the wounding of five others.
April 13
Pope John Paul II officially visits the Great Synagogue of Rome, the first time a modern Pope has visited a synagogue.
The first child born to a non-related surrogate mother is born.
April 14 – Hailstones weighing 1 kilogram (2.2 lb) fall on Gopalganj District, Bangladesh, killing 92.
April 15 – Operation El Dorado Canyon: At least 15 people die after United States planes bomb targets in the Libyan capital, Tripoli, and the Benghazi region.
April 16 – The United Kingdom and the Kingdom of the Netherlands sign a peace treaty, thus ending the Three Hundred and Thirty Five Years' War, one of the longest wars in human history.
April 17
Lebanon hostage crisis: British journalist John McCarthy is kidnapped in Beirut (he is released in August 1991) and three others are killed in retaliation for the bombing of Libya.
The Hindawi affair begins when an Irish woman is found carrying explosives onto an El Al flight from London to Tel Aviv.
An alleged state of war lasting 335 years between the Netherlands and the Isles of Scilly declared peace, bringing an end to any hypothetical war that may have existed.
April 18 – Titan 34D-9 explodes just after launch while carrying the final KH-9 satellite.
April 21 – Lorimar-Telepictures launches as a mass media company.
April 26 – Chernobyl disaster: A mishandled safety test at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant in Pripyat, Ukrainian SSR, Soviet Union "killed at least 4,056 people and damaged almost $7 billion of property". Radioactive fallout from the accident is concentrated near Belarus, Ukraine and Russia and at least 350,000 people are forcibly resettled away from these areas. After the accident, "traces of radioactive deposits unique to Chernobyl were in nearly every country in the northern hemisphere".
April 29 – The Diamond Jubilee of Hirohito is held at the Kokugikan in Tokyo.


=== May ===
May 2 – Expo 86, the 1986 World Exposition on Transportation and Communication, a World's fair, opens in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
May 8 – Óscar Arias is inaugurated into his first term as President of Costa Rica.
May 12 – NBC unveils its current peacock logo at the finale of its 60th anniversary special.
May 16
The Seville Statement on Violence is adopted by an international meeting of scientists, convened by the Spanish National Commission for UNESCO, in Seville, Spain.
Paramount Pictures releases Top Gun.
May 23 – Somali President Siad Barre is injured in a car accident in Mogadishu and taken to Saudi Arabia for treatment. Somali opposition groups see this as an opportunity to try to remove Barre, beginning the Somali Civil War.
May 25
Hands Across America: At least 5,000,000 people form a human chain from New York City to Long Beach, California, to raise money to fight hunger and homelessness.
The Bangladeshi double-decked ferry Shamia capsizes in the Meghna River, southern Barisal, Bangladesh, killing more than 500 by some estimates.
May 27
Islamic scholars Isma'il and Lois Lamya al-Faruqi are murdered in their home in Wyncote, Pennsylvania, drawing attention due to their academic prominence and the brutality of the attack.


=== June ===

June – Construction of the Oosterscheldekering, the world's largest openable storm surge flood barrier, is completed in the Netherlands.
June 4 – Jonathan Pollard pleads guilty to espionage for selling top secret United States military intelligence to Israel.
June 7 - Washington DC metro opens Falls Church, Vienna, and Dunn Loring train stations on the Orange line.
June 8 – Former United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim is elected president of Austria.
June 9 – The Rogers Commission releases its report on the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster.
June 12 – South Africa declares a nationwide state of emergency.
June 14 – Fantasyland's Mindbender derails and kills three people.
June 22 – In one of the most famous FIFA World Cup matches, Argentinian football player Diego Maradona scores one handball goal (nicknamed the "Hand of God") and then dribbles past the entire English football team to score a second goal (nicknamed "The Goal of the Century") with Argentina winning 2–1 against England.
June 23 – Eric Thomas develops LISTSERV, the first email list management software.
June 29 – Argentina defeats West Germany 3–2 to win the 1986 World Cup in Estadio Azteca in Mexico City.


=== July ===
July 2 – Walt Disney Pictures releases the company's 26th animated film, The Great Mouse Detective.
July 4 – The Statue of Liberty is reopened to the public after celebrating its centennial and an extensive refurbishment.
July 5 – 20 – The inaugural Goodwill Games are held in Moscow, marking the first international event in a decade for competition between the United States and the Soviet Union.
July 7 – Australian drug smugglers Kevin Barlow and Brian Chambers are executed in Malaysia.
July 11 – The New Zealand Homosexual Law Reform Act decriminalizes consensual sex between men from the age of 16.
July 23 – In London, the then Prince Andrew, Duke of York (later Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor) marries Sarah Ferguson at Westminster Abbey.


=== August ===
August 6
A low-pressure system moving from South Australia and redeveloping off the New South Wales coast dumps a record 328 millimetres (12.9 in) of rain in a day on Sydney.
Australian Democrats leader Don Chipp retires from federal parliament and is succeeded by Janine Haines, the first woman to lead a political party in Australia.
August 16 – Typhoon Wayne formed over the South China Sea, going on to become one of the longest-lived tropical cyclones at 21 days, and kill 490.
August 19 – Two weeks after it was stolen, the Picasso painting The Weeping Woman is found in a locker at the Spencer Street Station in Melbourne, Australia.
August 20 – In Edmond, Oklahoma, United States Postal Service employee Patrick Sherrill guns down 14 of his coworkers before committing suicide.
August 21 – The Lake Nyos disaster, a limnic eruption, occurs in Cameroon, killing nearly 2,000 people.
August 31
The Soviet passenger liner SS Admiral Nakhimov collides with the bulk carrier Pyotr Vasev in the Black Sea and sinks almost immediately, killing 398.
Aeroméxico Flight 498, a Douglas DC-9, collides with a Piper PA-28 over Cerritos, California, killing 82 (67 on both aircraft and 15 on the ground).
The cargo ship Khian Sea departs from the docks of Philadelphia, carrying 14,000 tons of toxic waste. It wanders the seas for the next 16 months trying to find a place to dump its cargo. The waste is later dumped in Haiti.


=== September ===

September 1 – Jordan University of Science and Technology is established in Jordan.
September 4 – Eusko Alkartasuna, the Basque Social Democratic Party, is created in Vitoria-Gasteiz.
September 5 – Pan Am Flight 73, with 358 people on board, is hijacked at Karachi International Airport by four Abu Nidal terrorists.
September 6
The Big Mac Index is introduced in The Economist newspaper as a semi-humorous international measure of purchasing power parity.
In Istanbul, two Abu Nidal terrorists kill 22 and wound 6 inside the Neve Shalom Synagogue during Shabbat services.
September 7
Desmond Tutu becomes the first black Anglican Church bishop in South Africa.
Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet survives an assassination attempt by the FPMR; 5 of Pinochet's bodyguards are killed.
September 13 – The 6.0 Mw Kalamata earthquake shook southern Greece with a maximum Mercalli intensity of X (Extreme). The shock left at least 20 dead, 300 injured, and caused $5 million in damage.
September 28 – The Democratic Progressive Party is founded. It was part of the Tangwai movement in the new generation to challenge Kuomintang in Taiwan's one-party politics, and is currently one of only two parties to win presidential elections in Taiwan.


=== October ===
October 1 – U.S. President Ronald Reagan signs the Goldwater–Nichols Act into law, making official the largest reorganization of the United States Department of Defense since the Air Force was made a separate branch of service in 1947.
October 3
TASCC, a superconducting cyclotron, officially opens at Chalk River Laboratories.
A hybrid solar eclipse was visible off the coast of Iceland, and was the 53rd solar eclipse of Solar Saros 124.
October 9
United States District Court Judge Harry E. Claiborne becomes the fifth federal official to be removed from office through impeachment.
News Corporation completes its acquisition of the Metromedia group of companies, thereby launching the Fox Broadcasting Company.
The Phantom of the Opera, the longest running Broadway show in history, opens at Her Majesty's Theatre in London.
October 10 – The 5.7 Mw  San Salvador earthquake shook San Salvador, El Salvador with a maximum Mercalli intensity of IX (Violent). Up to 1,500 people were killed.
October 11–12 – Cold War: Ronald Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev meet in Reykjavík, Iceland, to continue discussions about scaling back their intermediate missile arsenals in Europe, which end in failure.
October 16 – The International Olympic Committee chooses Albertville, France to be the host city of the 1992 Winter Olympics and Barcelona, Spain to be the host city of the 1992 Summer Olympics. The IOC also announces that the summer and winter games will separate with the winter games on every even, common year; and the summer games on every leap year starting from 1992.
October 19 – Mozambican President Samora Machel's plane crashes in South Africa, killing him and 33 and others.
October 21 – The Marshall Islands became an associated state under the Compact of Free Association.
October 22 – In New York City, WNBC Radio's traffic helicopter crashes into the Hudson River, killing traffic reporter Jane Dornacker. The last words heard on-the-air are Dornacker's screams of terror, "Hit the water! Hit the water! Hit the water!"
October 25 – A routine slow roller slips through Bill Buckner’s legs, allowing the New York Mets to complete a stunning comeback in Game 6 of the 1986 World Series against the Boston Red Sox. The Mets won 6–5 in 10 innings.
October 26
Bus deregulation goes into effect in the United Kingdom, except Greater London and Northern Ireland.
The state funeral of President Samora Machel of Mozambique takes place in Maputo.
October 27 – The New York Mets win 4 games to 3 in the 1986 World Series against the Boston Red Sox.
October 29 – British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher officially opens the M25 Motorway, which encircles Greater London, in a ceremony on the carriageway near Potters Bar. It became Europe's second longest orbital road upon completion, and provides the first and only full bypass of London.
October 30 – The National Park Passport Stamps program begins in the United States.


=== November ===

November 1
Queensland, Australia: Joh Bjelke-Petersen wins his final election as Premier of Queensland with 38.6% of the vote. He resigns on December 1, 1987, following revelations of his involvement with corruption released in the Fitzgerald Inquiry.
Sandoz chemical spill: A major environmental disaster near Basel, Switzerland pollutes the Rhine, when an agrochemical storehouse catches on fire.
November 3
Iran–Contra affair: The Lebanese magazine Ash-Shiraa reports that the United States has been selling weapons to Iran in secret, in order to secure the release of 7 American hostages held by pro-Iranian groups in Lebanon.
The Northern Mariana Islands enter in a political union with the United States. The island's government adopted its own constitution in 1977, and the constitutional government took office in January 1978. The covenant was fully implemented November 3, 1986, pursuant to Presidential Proclamation no. 5564, which conferred United States citizenship on legally qualified island residents.
November 6
45 people are killed in the 1986 British International Helicopters Chinook crash.
Alex Ferguson is appointed as the new manager of Manchester United.
November 18 – Greater Manchester Police announce that they will search for the bodies of 2 missing children (who both vanished more than 20 years ago) after the Moors murderers Ian Brady and Myra Hindley confess to 2 more murders.
November 21 – Iran-Contra Affair: National Security Council member Oliver North and his secretary, Fawn Hall, start shredding documents implicating them in selling weapons to Iran and channeling the proceeds to help fund the Contra rebels in Nicaragua.


=== December ===
December 4
The MV Amazon Venture oil tanker begins leaking oil while at the port of Savannah in the United States, resulting in an oil spill of approximately 500,000 US gallons (1,900,000 L).
29 people are killed in the Pozzetto massacre
December 6 – Johnny Hallyday released his 35th album Gang.
December 7 – A magnitude 5.7 earthquake destroys most of the Bulgarian town of Strajica, killing 2 people.
December 14 – Rutan Voyager, an experimental aircraft designed by Burt Rutan and piloted by Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager, begins its flight around the world from Edwards Air Force Base in the United States.
December 16 – Jeltoqsan, mass anti-government protests, break out across the Kazakh SSR, resulting in the massacre of over 165 protesters.
December 19 – Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov is permitted to return to Moscow after six years of internal exile.
December 20 – Three African Americans are assaulted by a group of white teens in the Howard Beach neighborhood of Queens, New York. One of the victims, Michael Griffith, is run over and killed by a motorist while attempting to flee the attackers.
December 23 – Rutan Voyager completes the first nonstop circumnavigation of the earth by air without refueling in 9 days, 3 minutes and 44 seconds.
December 31
Dupont Plaza Hotel arson: A hotel fire in San Juan, Puerto Rico, kills 97 and injures 140.
Soviet submarine Krasnoyarsk (K-173) is commissioned.


=== Date unknown ===
Average per capita income in Japan exceeds that in the United States.
The first commercially available 3D printer is sold.
Opus Pro, a Latvian hard rock group, is established.
The band Sweet Children (now known as Green Day) was formed by the lead singer, Billie Joe Armstrong.
The Province of Flevoland is established in the Netherlands.


== Births ==
Those born in the year 1986 are considered millennials (Generation Y or Gen Y).


=== January ===

January 1
Pablo Cuevas, Uruguayan tennis player
Glen Davis, American basketball player
Lee Sung-min, South Korean actor and singer
Colin Morgan, Northern Irish actor
Jessica Gunning, English actress
January 2
Yulia, Russian-New Zealander classical crossover singer
Nathan Cowen, New Zealand rower
Nicole Reinhardt, German canoeist
Trombone Shorty, American jazz musician
January 4
Katrina Halili, Filipina actress and commercial model
Andrei Krauchanka, Belarusian decathlete
Hsieh Su-wei, Taiwanese tennis player
James Milner, English footballer
January 5
Teppei Koike, Japanese singer and actor
Deepika Padukone, Indian actress and producer
Yana Shemyakina, Ukrainian fencer
January 6
Paul McShane, Irish professional footballer
Petter Northug, Norwegian Olympic skier
Irina Shayk, Russian model
Peng Shuai, Chinese tennis player
Michelle Waterson, American mixed martial artist and model
Alex Turner, English musician
January 8
Jaclyn Linetsky, Canadian actress and voice actress (d. 2003)
David Silva, Spanish footballer
January 10
Abbey Clancy, English model
Kirsten Flipkens, Belgian tennis player
Chen Jin, Chinese badminton player
Suzanne Harmes, Dutch artistic gymnast
Kenneth Vermeer, Dutch footballer
January 12
Jakob Oftebro, Norwegian actor
Zlata Ognevich, Ukrainian singer
Dani Osvaldo, Argentine born-Italian footballer
January 13
Laura Ludwig, German beach volleyball player
Joannie Rochette, Canadian figure skater
January 14 – Yohan Cabaye, French footballer
January 15 – Jessy Schram, American actress
January 16 – Paula Pareto, Argentinian judoka
January 17
Max Adler, American actor
Chloe Rose Lattanzi, Australian actress and singer
January 18
Marya Roxx, Estonian musician
Becca Tobin, American actress and singer
January 19 – Claudio Marchisio, Italian footballer
January 20 – Genie Chuo, Taiwanese singer and actress
January 21
Jonathan Quick, American Ice Hockey player
Sushant Singh Rajput, Indian actor (d. 2020)
January 23
José Enrique, Spanish footballer
Michael Stevens, American scientist and entertainer
January 24
Mischa Barton, British-American actress
Raviv Ullman, Israeli-American actor, director, and musician
January 26
Gerald Green, American basketball player
Matt Heafy, American musician
Kim Jae-joong, South Korean actor and pop singer
Taylor Wilde, Canadian professional wrestler
January 28
Dame Jessica Ennis-Hill, British heptathlete
Shruti Haasan, Indian actress and musician
January 29
Drew Tyler Bell, American actor and dancer
Sarah Jaffe, American singer


=== February ===

February 1 – Lauren Conrad, American television personality and fashion designer
February 2
Gemma Arterton, British actress
Miwa Asao, Japanese beach volleyball player
February 5
Kevin Gates, American hip-hop musician and entrepreneur
Madison Rayne, American professional wrestler
Billy Sharp, English footballer
February 6
Vedran Ćorluka, Croatian international footballer
Dane DeHaan, American actor
Alice Greczyn, American actress and model
Sofia Nizharadze, Georgian pop musician
Yunho, South Korean actor and singer
February 8
Anna Hutchison, New Zealand actress
Anderson .Paak, American musician and record producer
February 9 – Ciprian Tătărușanu, Romanian footballer
February 10
Radamel Falcao, Colombian footballer
Yui Ichikawa, Japanese actress
Viktor Troicki, Serbian tennis player
February 11 – Gabriel Boric, President of Chile
February 12 – Valorie Curry, American actress
February 13 – Hamish Bond, New Zealand rower
February 14
Aschwin Wildeboer, Spanish swimmer
Tiffany Thornton, American actress, radio personality and singer
February 15
Valeri Bojinov, Bulgarian footballer
Ami Koshimizu, Japanese voice actress
Amber Riley, American actress, singer and author
February 16
Jessica von Bredow-Werndl, German dressage rider
Diego Godín, Uruguayan footballer
February 17 – Brett Kern, American football player
February 18
Vika Jigulina, Moldovan born-Romanian music producer, dance singer and DJ
Alessandra Mastronardi, Italian actress
Gregory Vargas, Venezuelan basketball player
February 19
Björn Gustafsson, Swedish comedian
Ophelia Lovibond, British actress
Marta, Brazilian-born footballer
Maria Mena, Norwegian pop singer
February 21
Prince Amedeo of Belgium, Archduke of Austria-Este, member of the Belgian royal family
Charlotte Church, Welsh singer, actress, and television presenter
February 22
Miko Hughes, American actor
Rajon Rondo, American basketball player
February 23
Skylar Grey, American pop singer
Kazuya Kamenashi, Japanese singer-songwriter and actor
Jerod Mayo, American football player
Ola Svensson, Swedish pop singer
February 24 – Milcah Chemos Cheywa, Kenyan middle-distance runner
February 25
Danny Saucedo, Swedish pop and dance singer
Justin Berfield, American actor, writer, and producer
James and Oliver Phelps, English actors
February 26
Leila Lopes, Angolan Miss Universe
Crystal Kay, Japanese actress and pop singer
Teresa Palmer, Australian actress, writer, model and film producer


=== March ===

March 1
Big E
Ayumu Goromaru, Japanese rugby union player
Jonathan Spector, American soccer player
March 2 – Ethan Peck, American actor
March 3
Stacie Orrico, American singer
Mehmet Topal, Turkish footballer
March 4 – Margo Harshman, American actress
March 5
Corey Brewer, American basketball player
Julie Henderson, American model
Sarah J. Maas, American novelist
Mika Newton, Ukrainian singer
Shikabala, Egyptian footballer
March 6
Francisco Cervelli, Venezuelan baseball player
Eli Marienthal, American actor
Charlie Mulgrew, Scottish footballer
Lucas Saatkamp, Brazilian volleyball player
March 8
Tal Slutzker, Israeli painter and poet
Princess Tsuguko of Takamado, member of the Japanese imperial family
March 9 – Brittany Snow, American actress, producer, director and singer
March 11
Dario Cologna, Swiss Olympic skier
Ed Gamble, English comedian
Mariko Shinoda, Japanese singer, actress, fashion model, and idol
March 12
Danny Jones, British musician
František Rajtoral, Czech footballer (d. 2017)
March 13 – Silvija Popović, Serbian volleyball player
March 14 – Jamie Bell, English actor and dancer
March 15 – Jai Courtney, Australian actor
March 16
Alexandra Daddario, American actress
Ken Doane, American professional wrestler
Daisuke Takahashi, Japanese figure skater
March 17
Edin Džeko, Bosnian footballer
Olesya Rulin, Russian-born actress
March 18
Lykke Li, Swedish singer-songwriter
Cory Schneider, American Ice Hockey player
March 19 – Anne Vyalitsyna, Russian model
March 20 – Ruby Rose, Australian actress and model
March 21
Scott Eastwood, American actor
Michu, Spanish footballer
March 22 – Matt Nicholls, English drummer
March 23
Brett Eldredge, American country music singer
Steven Strait, American musician, actor, and fashion model
March 24
Valentin Chmerkovskiy, Ukrainian-American dancer
Nathalia Dill, Brazilian actress
Anxhela Peristeri, Albanian singer and songwriter
March 25
Marco Belinelli, Italian basketball player
Megan Gibson-Loftin, American softball player
Kyle Lowry, American basketball player
March 26
Jonny Craig, Canadian-American singer
Jessica Hart, Australian model
Misty Stone, American pornographic actress
Alexander Taraikovsky, Belarusian demonstrator (d. 2020)
March 27
SoCal Val, American professional wrestling personality
Manuel Neuer, German football goalkeeper
March 28
Lady Gaga, American singer, songwriter and actress
Bowe Bergdahl, American soldier and deserter captured by the Taliban
Amaia Salamanca, Spanish actress and model
Barbora Strýcová, Czech tennis player
March 29
Lucas Elliot Eberl, American actor and director
Romina Oprandi, Italian tennis player
March 30
Beni, Japanese singer
Tessa Ferrer, American actress
Sergio Ramos, Spanish footballer


=== April ===

April 1
Kid Ink, American hip-hop musician
Özge Özpirinçci, Turkish actress
Hillary Scott, American musician
Ireen Wüst, Dutch speed skater
April 2
Lee DeWyze, American rock musician
Drew Van Acker, American actor
April 3
Amanda Bynes, American actress and fashion designer
Coleen Rooney, English media personality
April 4
Eunhyuk, South Korean actor and singer
Labinot Harbuzi, Swedish footballer (d. 2018)
Jason Richardson, American hurdler
April 5, Charlotte Flair, American professional wrestler
April 7
Choi Si-won, South Korean actor and singer
Yu Yang, Chinese badminton player
April 8
Igor Akinfeev, Russian footballer
Cliff Avril, American football player
Félix Hernández, Venezuelan baseball player
Natalia Ishchenko, Russian synchronized swimmer
Erika Sawajiri, Japanese actress, singer, and model
April 9
Leighton Meester, American actress
Jordan Masterson, American actor
April 10
Sam Attwater, British actor
Fernando Gago, Argentine footballer
Vincent Kompany, Belgian footballer
April 12
Blerim Džemaili, SR Macedonia-born Swiss footballer
Marcel Granollers, Spanish tennis player
Matt McGorry, American actor and activist
April 14 – Thaila Ayala, Brazilian actress and model
April 15 – Tom Heaton, English footballer
April 16
Sufe Bradshaw, American actress
Shinji Okazaki, Japanese football player
Paul Di Resta, British racing driver
April 17
Romain Grosjean, French racing driver
Zheng Kai, Chinese actor
April 18 – Maurice Edu, American footballer
April 19 – Candace Parker, American basketball player
April 22
Amber Heard, American actress
Marshawn Lynch, American football player
April 23
Sven Kramer, Dutch speed skater
Jessica Stam, Canadian model
April 24
Kellin Quinn, American singer and musician
Tahyna Tozzi, Australian model, singer and actress
April 25
Gwen Jorgensen, American triathlete
Daniel Sharman, English actor
April 26 – Juan Sebastián Cabal, Colombian tennis player
April 27
Jenna Coleman, British actress
Dinara Safina, Russian tennis player
April 28
Jenna Ushkowitz, American stage and television actress and singer
Jazmín Beccar Varela, Argentine actress
April 30
Dianna Agron, American actress, singer and dancer
Zhang Nan, Chinese artistic gymnast


=== May ===

May 1
Christian Benítez, Ecuadorian footballer (d. 2013)
Jesse Klaver, Dutch politician
Diego Valeri, Argentine footballer
Cassie Jaye, American actress and film director
May 2
Sani Kaita, Nigerian footballer
Thomas McDonell, American actor, musician, and artist
May 5 – Grace Wong, Hong Kong actress and beauty pageant contestant
May 6
Gims, Congolese born-French rapper
Tyler Hynes, Canadian actor and filmmaker
Sasheer Zamata, American actress and comedian
May 8
Galen Rupp, American long distance and marathon runner
Laura Spencer, American actress
May 10 – Fernanda Garay, Brazilian volleyball player
May 12
Jonathan Orozco, Mexican footballer
Christinna Pedersen, Danish badminton player
Emily VanCamp, Canadian actress
May 13
Lena Dunham, American actress and producer
Robert Pattinson, English actor and musician
Alexander Rybak, Norwegian singer and violinist
Nino Schurter, Swiss mountain bike cyclist
May 14
Alyosha, Ukrainian singer
Mey Chan, Indonesian singer
Marco Motta, Italian footballer
Camila Sodi, Mexican actress, singer and model
May 15 – Matías Fernández, Chilean footballer
May 16
Drew Roy, American actor
Megan Fox, American actress and model
Shamcey Supsup, Filipina beauty queen, host and pageant director
May 17
Amy Gumenick, Swedish actress
Tahj Mowry, American actor and singer
Eric Lloyd, American actor, comedian, musician and producer
Erin Richards, Welsh actress, director and writer
May 18
Kevin Anderson, South African tennis player
Natalia Osipova, Russian ballerina
May 20
Louisa Krause, American actress
Kyle Patrick, American musician
May 21
Kevin Kraxner, former Austrian ice hockey player
Ricardo Lockette, American football player
Mario Mandžukić, Croatian footballer
Da'Vine Joy Randolph, American actress
May 22
Thandeka Mdeliswa, South African actress (d. 2020)
Julian Edelman, American football player
Molly Ephraim, American actress
Tatiana Volosozhar, Ukrainian-born Russian figure skater
May 23
Nico Colaluca, American footballer
Ryan Coogler, American film director, producer, and screenwriter
Valentina Marchei, Italian figure skater
Jordan Zimmermann, American baseball player
May 24
Mark Ballas, American dancer, actor, and musician
Carolina Rodriguez, Spanish rhythmic gymnast
May 25
Neon Hitch, English singer
Geraint Thomas, Welsh racing cyclist
Juri Ueno, Japanese actress
May 26
Àstrid Bergès-Frisbey, Spanish actress and model
Fern Brady, Scottish comedian
Nao Kodaira, Japanese speed skater
May 27 – Timo Descamps, Belgian actor and singer
May 28
Joseph Cross, American actor
Bryant Dunston, American-Armenian basketball player
Charles N'Zogbia, French footballer
Britt McHenry, American sports reporter
Seth Rollins, American professional wrestler
May 29
Hornswoggle, American professional wrestler and actor
Eleazar Gómez, Mexican actor
Jaslene Gonzalez, Puerto Rican fashion model
May 30
Will Peltz, American actor
Pasha Parfeni, Moldovan singer
May 31
Brooke Castile, American figure skater
Robert Gesink, Dutch cyclist
Sopho Khalvashi, Georgian musician
Melissa McIntyre, Canadian actress


=== June ===

June 1
Ricardo Abarca, Mexican actor and singer
Moses Ndiema Masai, Kenyan runner
Dayana Mendoza, Venezuelan model and beauty queen
Chinedu Obasi, Nigerian footballer
Skream, British DJ and producer
Ben Smith, New Zealand rugby player
June 2
Todd Carney, Australian rugby player
Matt Kean, English bassist
Curtis Lofton, American football player
June 3
Al Horford, Dominican basketball player
Micah Kogo, Kenyan runner
Rafael Nadal, Spanish tennis player
Josh Segarra, American actor
Adrián Vallés, Spanish race car driver
Tomáš Verner, Czech Republic ice skater
June 4
Oona Chaplin, Spanish-English actress and dancer
Fahriye Evcen, German-Turkish actress
Shane Kippel, Canadian actor
Shelly Woods, British wheelchair racer
Yoochun, South Korean musician and actor
June 5
Christian Baracat, German rugby player
Dave Bolland, Canadian ice hockey player
Amanda Crew, Canadian actress
Vernon Gholston, American football player
June 6
Justin Allgaier, American race car driver
Kim Hyun-joong, South Korean actor, model and singer
Junichi Tazawa, Japanese-American baseball player
Leslie Carter, American pop singer (d. 2012)
June 9 – Adamo Ruggiero, Canadian actor
June 10
Hajime Hosogai, Japanese footballer
Joey Zimmerman, American actor and musician
June 11 – Shia LaBeouf, American actor, performance artist, and filmmaker
June 12
Benjamin Schmideg, Australian actor
Cintia Dicker, Brazilian model
Jessica Keenan Wynn, American actress
Luke Youngblood, British actor
Mario Casas, Spanish actor
Gary Buckland, Welsh former professional boxer of Romani descent
June 13
Kat Dennings, American actress
DJ Snake, French DJ and producer
Keisuke Honda, Japanese football player
Ashley Olsen, American actress
Mary-Kate Olsen, American actress
Onuma Sittirak, Thai volleyball player
Måns Zelmerlöw, Swedish pop singer and television presenter
June 14 – Haley Hudson, American actress
June 15 – Momoko Ueda, Japanese golfer
June 16 – Fernando Muslera, Uruguayan footballer
June 17
Marie Avgeropoulos, Canadian actress and model
Lisa Haydon, Indian actress
June 18
Richard Gasquet, French tennis player
Richard Madden, Scottish actor
Shusaku Nishikawa, Japanese footballer
Meaghan Rath, Canadian film and television actress
Crystal Renn, American model and author
June 19 – Marvin Williams, American basketball player
June 20 – Dreama Walker, American actress
June 21 – Cheick Tioté, Ivorian footballer (d. 2017)
June 23
Michael Annett, American racing driver (d. 2025)
Marti Malloy, American judoka
Colin Ryan, English actor
Simon Špilak, Slovenian road bicycle racer
June 24
Stuart Broad, English cricketer
Solange Knowles, American actress and singer
Bojana Stamenov, Serbian singer
June 25
Lee Ho-suk, South Korean short-track skater
Ace Mahbaz, Iranian actor and writer
June 26
Jordan Fish, British keyboardist, singer-songwriter and producer
Mohd Farizal Marlias, Malaysian footballer
June 27
Drake Bell, American actor, voice actor, singer, songwriter, and musician
Sam Claflin, British actor
LaShawn Merritt, American sprinter
June 28
Suzuko Mimori, Japanese voice actress and singer
Kellie Pickler, American singer
Shadia Simmons, Canadian actress
Maya Stojan, Swiss actress
June 29
Christopher Egan, Australian actor
Edward Maya, Romanian musician
Iya Villania, Filipina TV personality
June 30 – Alicia Fox, American professional wrestler and model


=== July ===

July 1 – Charlie Blackmon, American baseball player
July 2
Lindsay Lohan, American actress and singer
Bruno Rezende, Brazilian volleyball player
Kseniya Sydorenko, Ukrainian synchronized swimmer
Katie Taylor, Irish boxer
July 3
Oscar Ustari, Argentine footballer
Felixia Yeap, Malaysian model
July 4 – Takahisa Masuda, Japanese actor and singer
July 5
Iurii Cheban, Ukrainian canoe sprinter
Ashkan Dejagah, Iranian footballer
Adam Young, American musician
July 7
Ana Kasparian, American progressive political commentator, media host, and journalist
Sevyn Streeter, American singer
July 8
Kaiane Aldorino, Gibraltarian politician, beauty queen who won Miss World 2009
Renata Costa, Brazilian footballer
Jake McDorman, American film and television actor
July 9 – Kiely Williams, American actress and singer
July 10
Shintaro Yamada, Japanese fashion model, actor and singer
Wyatt Russell, American actor
Tom Richards, English squash player
July 11 – Raúl García, Spanish footballer
July 12 – JP Pietersen, South African rugby player
July 13 – Stanley Weber, French actor and theatre director
July 14
Sanam Baloch, Pakistani VJ, actress and anchor
Peta Murgatroyd, New Zealand-born Australian dancer
Dan Smith, British singer
Ambruse Vanzekin, Nigerian footballer
July 15
Yahya Abdul-Mateen II, American actor
Mishael Morgan, Canadian actress
July 17
Dana, Korean singer, dancer and actress
Mojo Rawley, American professional wrestler and former American professional football player
Brando Eaton, American film and television actor
July 18
James Sorensen, Australian model and actor
Travis Milne, Canadian actor
July 19 – Jinder Mahal, Canadian professional wrestler
July 20 – Osric Chau, Canadian actor and martial artist
July 21
Livia Brito, Cuban-Mexican actress and model
Betty Gilpin, American actress
Diane Guerrero, American actress
July 23
Aya Uchida, Japanese voice actress
Ayaka Komatsu, Japanese actress, model and gravure idol
July 24
Vugar Gashimov, Azerbaijani chess grandmaster (d. 2014)
Megan Park, Canadian actress and singer
Natalie Tran, Australian comedian
Remy Hii, Malaysian-Australian actor
July 25 – Hulk, Brazilian footballer
July 26 – Monica Raymund, American actress
July 28
Alexandra Chando, American actress
Nolan Gerard Funk, Canadian actor and singer
July 31
Sean Eldridge, Canadian-born American political and gay activist
Paola Espinosa, Mexican diver
Evgeni Malkin, Russian hockey player


=== August ===

August 1
Josh Harder, American politician
Daisy May Cooper, English actress and writer
Elena Vesnina, Russian tennis player
August 2 – Lily Gladstone, Native-American actress
August 3
Charlotte Casiraghi, Monegasque heiress, royal and socialite
Darya Domracheva, Belarusian biathlete and coach
Prince Louis of Luxembourg, Prince of Luxembourg
August 4 – Oleg Ivanov, Russian footballer
August 5
Paula Creamer, American golfer
Kyoko Oshima, Japanese artistic gymnast
August 6
Nanna Blondell, Swedish actress
Bryan Young, Canadian ice hockey player
August 7
Altaír Jarabo, Mexican actress and model
Paul Biedermann, German swimmer
August 8
Kateryna Volodko, Ukrainian tennis player
Jackie Cruz, Dominican-American actress
Peyton List, American actress
Paula Forteza, French-Argentine politician
August 11
Kaori Fukuhara, Japanese voice actress
Colby Rasmus, American baseball player
August 13 – Demetrious Johnson, American mixed martial artist and former 11-time UFC Flyweight World Champion, and also the current ONE Flyweight World Champion
August 14 – Nigel Boogaard, Australian footballer
August 15 – Teddy Sinclair, English singer-songwriter
August 16
Yu Darvish, Japanese baseball player
Sarah Pavan, Canadian beach volleyball player
August 18
Antonin Rouzier, French volleyball player
Miesha Tate, American professional mixed martial artist
August 19
Christina Perri, American pop and rock musician
Tian Qing, Chinese badminton player
August 20 – Ryo Katsuji, Japanese actor and voice actor
August 21
Usain Bolt, Jamaican sprinter
Brooks Wheelan, American actor, comedian and writer
Paetongtarn Shinawatra - 31st Prime Minister of Thailand
August 22
Keiko Kitagawa, Japanese actress
Benjamin Satterley, English professional wrestler
Syko Stu, American wrestler
August 23
Ayron Jones, American musician
Neil Cicierega, American Internet artist
Andra, Romanian singer
August 26
Big K.R.I.T., American rapper
Cassie Ventura, American singer, songwriter, model, actress and dancer
Saint Jhn, Guyanese-American rapper, singer, songwriter, and record producer
August 27 – Sebastian Kurz, Austrian politician, 25th Chancellor of Austria
August 28
Briggs, Australian rapper
Armie Hammer, American actor
Gilad Shalit, Israeli soldier/hostage
Florence Welch, British singer
August 29
Lea Michele, American actress, singer, and author
Hajime Isayama, Japanese manga artist, and creator of Attack on Titan
August 30 – Ryan Ross, American guitarist
August 31
Melanie Schlanger, Australian freestyle swimmer
Feng Tianwei, Singaporean table tennis player
Johnny Wactor, American actor (d. 2024)


=== September ===

September 1 – Jean Sarkozy, French politician
September 2
Moses Ndiema Kipsiro, Ugandan middle-distance runner
Stevan Faddy, Montenegrin singer
September 3
OMI, Jamaican-born singer
Shaun White, American professional snowboarder
September 4
Jaclyn Hales, American actress
Xavier Woods, American professional wrestler
September 5 – Francis Ngannou, Cameroonian Professional MMA Fighter
September 7 – Charlie Daniels, English footballer
September 8
Leah LaBelle, Canadian-born American singer (d. 2018)
Jake Sandvig, American actor
September 9 – José Aldo, Brazilian mixed martial artist
September 10 – Sarah Levy, Canadian actress
September 12
Alfie Allen, English actor
Yuto Nagatomo, Japanese footballer
Emmy Rossum, American actress and singer
Yang Mi, Chinese actress and singer
September 13 – Kamui Kobayashi, Japanese professional racing driver
September 14
Michelle Jenner, Spanish actress
Tinchy Stryder, Ghanaian musician
Ai Takahashi, Japanese singer
September 15
Jenna Marbles, American YouTuber
Heidi Montag, American television personality
September 16 – Kyla Pratt, American actress
September 18
Keeley Hazell, English model and actress
Renaud Lavillenie, French pole vaulter
September 19
Mandy Musgrave, American actress
Sally Pearson, Australian athlete
Ilya Salmanzadeh, Swedish music producer
Peter Vack, American actor, writer, director and producer
September 20
Aldis Hodge, American actor
Diego Sinagra, Italian footballer
September 21 – Lindsey Stirling, American violinist, dancer, performance artist, and composer
September 24
Leah Dizon, American singer and model
Eloise Mumford, American actress
September 25 – Jiang Tingting, Chinese synchronized swimmer
September 26 – Ashley Leggat, Canadian actress
September 27 – Natasha Thomas, Danish singer and songwriter
September 28 – Andrés Guardado, Mexican footballer
September 30
Cristián Zapata, Colombian footballer
Olivier Giroud, French footballer
Ki Hong Lee, Korean-American actor


=== October ===

October 1
Sayaka Kanda, Japanese actress and singer (d. 2021)
Jurnee Smollett, American actress
October 2
Camilla Belle, Brazilian-American actress, director, writer and producer
Kiko Casilla, Spanish footballer
October 3 – Joonas Suotamo, Finnish basketball player and actor
October 4
Sara Forestier, French actress
Nina Vislova, Russian badminton player
October 5 – Novica Veličković, Serbian basketball player
October 6
Luisa D'Oliveira, Canadian actress
Tereza Kerndlová, Czech singer
Olivia Thirlby, American actress
October 7
Holland Roden, American actress
Amber Stevens West, American actress and model
October 9
Ezequiel Garay, Argentine footballer
Blagoy Ivanov, Bulgarian mixed martial artist
Laure Manaudou, French swimmer
October 10
Lucy Griffiths, English actress
Nathan Jawai, Australian basketball player
October 12
Tyler Blackburn, American actor, singer and model
Cristhian Stuani, Uruguayan footballer
Li Wenliang, Chinese ophthalmologist (he warned about COVID-19) (d. 2020)
October 13 – Gabby Agbonlahor, English footballer
October 14
Wesley Matthews, American basketball player
Iveta Mukuchyan, Armenian singer, model and actress
Skyler Shaye, American actress
October 15
Ali Fazal, Indian actor
Paul Walter Hauser, American actor
Lee Donghae, Korean singer
October 16
Franco Armani, Argentine footballer
Jordan Larson, American volleyball player
Craig Pickering, English sprinter
Inna, Romanian singer
October 17 – Mohombi, Congolese-Swedish urban singer-songwriter and dancer
October 18 – Loukas Giorkas, Greek-Cypriot singer and model
October 19 – Monday James, Nigerian footballer
October 20 – Elyse Taylor, Australian model
October 21
Almen Abdi, Serbian born-Swiss footballer
Tamerlan Tsarnaev, Russian-American terrorist (d. 2013)
Christopher von Uckermann, Mexican-Swedish singer, songwriter and actor
October 22
Kyle Gallner, American actor
Kara Lang, Canadian soccer player
October 23
Emilia Clarke, English actress
Jessica Stroup, American actress and fashion model
LoLa Monroe, American rapper, model and actress
October 24
Drake, Canadian actor and hip-hop rapper
Nobuhiko Okamoto, Japanese voice actor and singer
John Ruddy, English footballer
October 25 – Chiquito Felipe do Carmo, East Timorese football player
October 26 – Schoolboy Q, American rapper
October 27
Alba Flores, Spanish actress
Erica Dasher, American actress
Inbar Lavi, Israeli actress
October 28
May Calamawy, Egyptian-Palestinian actress
Tamar Kaprelian, Armenian-American musician and singer
October 29
Italia Ricci, Canadian actress
Derek Theler, American actor
October 30
Thomas Morgenstern, Austrian Olympic ski jumper
Hiba Abouk, Spanish-Tunisian actress


=== November ===

November 1 – Penn Badgley, American actor and musician
November 3
Davon Jefferson, American  basketball player
Jasmine Trias, Filipino singer
Heo Young-Saeng, South Korean singer
November 4
Hanna Jaff, American born-Mexican journalist, media personality and business person
Alexz Johnson, Canadian actress and singer
Angelica Panganiban, Filipino-American actress and comedian
November 5
Kasper Schmeichel, Danish footballer
Nodiko Tatishvili, Georgian singer
November 8 – Aaron Swartz, American programmer (d. 2013)
November 10
Nong-O Gaiyanghadao, Thai Muay Thai kickboxer and former ONE Bantamweight Muymay Thai World Champion
Andy Mientus, American actor, singer, composer and writer
Josh Peck, American actor and director
Eric Thames, American baseball player
Samuel Wanjiru, Kenyan athlete (d. 2011)
November 11
François Trinh-Duc, French rugby player
Greta Salóme Stefánsdóttir, Icelandic singer and violinist
Radhika Kumaraswamy, Indian actress
Rafael de la Fuente, Venezuelan actor and singer
November 12 – Evan Yo, Taiwanese singer-songwriter
November 13 – Kevin Bridges, Scottish stand-up comedian
November 14
Cory Michael Smith, American actor
Yuna, Malaysian singer, songwriter, and businesswoman
November 15
Winston Duke, Tobagonian actor
Sania Mirza, Indian tennis player
Matthew Patrick, American web video producer
November 17
Karmichael Hunt, New Zealand-Australian sportsperson
Nani, Cape Verde-born Portuguese footballer
Greg Rutherford, British athlete
Alexis Vastine, French boxer (d. 2015)
November 19
Erin Hamlin, American luger
Dayron Robles, Cuban hurdler
November 20
Ashley Fink, American actress and singer
Oliver Sykes, English musician and vocalist of Bring Me the Horizon
November 21 – Sam Palladio, British actor and musician
November 22
Oscar Pistorius, South African Paralympic runner
Sebastián Zurita, Mexican actor
November 24
Jimmy Graham, American football player
Pedro León, Spanish soccer player
Micaela Vázquez, Argentine actress
November 25 – Katie Cassidy, American singer and model
November 26
Carly Gullickson, American tennis player
Kanae Ito, Japanese voice actress
November 27 – Suresh Raina, Indian cricket player
November 28 – Johnny Simmons, American actor


=== December ===

December 1
DeSean Jackson, American football player
Andrew Tate, American-British Internet personality and former professional kickboxer
December 3 – Leah Wilkinson, British field hockey player
December 4 – Martell Webster, American basketball player
December 7 – Jakov Milatović, President of Montenegro
December 8
Amir Khan, British boxer
Kate Voegele, American singer-songwriter and actress
December 9 – Aron Baynes, Australian basketball player
December 11
Alex House, Canadian actor
Lee Peltier, English footballer
Condola Rashad, American actress
December 15
Lauren Boebert, American politician
Keylor Navas, Costa Rican footballer
Xiah, Korean singer
December 17 – Emma Bell, American actress
December 18 – Jery Sandoval, Colombian actress, model and singer
December 19
Ryan Babel, Dutch footballer
Zuzana Hejnová, Czech hurdler
December 23 – Balázs Dzsudzsák, Hungarian footballer
December 24
Ana Brenda Contreras, Mexican actress and singer
Satomi Ishihara, Japanese actress
December 26
Joe Alexander, American-Israeli basketball player
Mew Azama, Japanese actress
Kit Harington, British actor
Hugo Lloris, French footballer
Selen Soyder, Turkish actress, model and beauty pageant
December 27
Jamaal Charles, American football player
Shelly-Ann Fraser-Pryce, Jamaican sprinter
Chris Rörland, Swedish metal musician and graphic designer
December 29 – Kim Ok-vin, South Korean actress and model
December 30
Onyekachi Apam, Nigerian footballer
Ellie Goulding, British singer
Date unknown
Simone Bacci, Italian associate professor of Italian, conference interpreter and researcher in linguistics


== Deaths ==


== Nobel Prizes ==

Physics – Ernst Ruska, Gerd Binnig, Heinrich Rohrer
Chemistry – Dudley R. Herschbach, Yuan T. Lee, John Polanyi
Physiology or Medicine – Stanley Cohen, Rita Levi-Montalcini
Literature – Wole Soyinka
Peace – Elie Wiesel
Economics – James M. Buchanan


== References ==