Hrot (stylized as HROT) is a 2023 first-person shooter video game developed by Spytihněv. The game is a homage to the 3D shooters of the 1990s and is primarily inspired by Chasm: The Rift and Quake. The early access version was released on 29 January 2021, and included the first of three episodes. The full version was released on 16 May 2023.


== Plot ==
The story is set in Czechoslovakia following an unspecified disaster of 1986. The protagonist leaves a civil defense shelter under Kosmonautů station to fight strange intruders who attacked Czechoslovakia. He fights these enemies throughout Prague and other places of Czechoslovakia. He eventually finds out that Orloj isn't working as it lost a gear. According to a local legend, the country will suffer if the clock is neglected and its good operation is placed in jeopardy. The protagonist reaches Strahov Stadium. He fights the supreme commander-in-chief of intruders who damaged Orloj and defeats him. The protagonist then destroys his heart and takes the gear from Orloj that was placed in the commander's heart. It allows the protagonist to repair Orloj and save the country in process.


== Gameplay ==
Hrot is a retro-styled first-person shooter. Players explore and navigate to the exit of each level, facing monsters and finding secret areas along the way. Usually, there are switches to activate or keys to collect in order to open doors before the exit can be reached. Reaching the exit takes the player to the next level.
The campaign is divided into three episodes. It is set in 1986 in an alternate reality Czechoslovakia which was struck by an unknown disaster. The first episode has 8 levels with a boss fight in every second level. Each level is set in a real location in Prague. This includes Vyšehrad or Vítkov Hill. The second episode, which was inspired by the Hussite era and Bohemian castles, released on 22 June 2022. The third episode, titled The Gastroscopy, features another 8 levels and an additional secret level.


== Development ==
Hrot was in development since 2017. The developer used his own proprietary engine, programmed in Pascal and utilizing the GLScene graphics library. The idea for the game first came in 1997 when Spytihněv considered developing a game similar to Quake or Chasm: The Rift. The game was announced in September 2019. The early access version was released on 29 January 2021, and included the first of three episodes called Kiss me Gustav. The second episode called Degustation was released on 22 June 2022. The full version with the final episode called Gastroscopy was released on 16 May 2023.


== Reception ==

On Metacritic, Hrot received  Generally favorable reviews as it holds 86% on Metacritic based on 6 reviews.
Rock Paper Shotgun praises its design but criticizes its weapon selection.
On Czech Game of the Year Awards 2023, the game received a prize for Best Game Design.


== References ==