Since Ukraine declared independence from the Soviet Union on 24 August 1991, many populated places and administrative divisions in the country have had their names changed as part of the derussification of toponyms (placenames) in Ukraine. These changes have involved the removal of placenames connected to people, places, events, and organizations associated with Russia and Russian imperialism as well as the restoration of historical placenames that had been changed earlier in Ukraine's history by the Russian or Soviet government with the intention of removing local heritage. Derussification has also included the respellings or rewordings of names to match standard spelling and word usages in the Ukrainian language. The official names of populated places and raions (districts) in the country are determined through legislation passed by the Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine's parliament, typically at the request of local authorities; urban districts are named by each city's municipal council. During the Soviet period, particularly in the 1920s and 1930s, officials engaged in a significant renaming campaign to promote Bolshevism, replacing thousands of historical placenames in the country of both Russian and Ukrainian origin with generic propaganda toponyms based on prominent communist symbols and figures. In the 1980s, following the Soviet adoption of the liberalizing policies of glasnost and perestroika, Soviet Ukrainian and local governments carried out amongst the first limited derussification as they gained greater autonomy, returning some historical placenames and modifying others, notably with the renaming of the city and oblast of Rovno to Rivne on 11 June 1991 to bring it in line with Ukrainian language standards. After independence, derussification efforts were sporadic, with most name changes in the initial decades post-independence resulting from the restoration of pre-Soviet names through local efforts. Following the months-long Euromaidan protests and beginning of the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2014, hundreds of placenames dedicated to communist figures and the Soviet Union were changed as major decommunization legislation was enacted in 2016. However, most Russian names not directly associated with communism or included in the decommunization legislation continued to stay in place as derussification remained less popular than decommunization.
After Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, derussification gained widespread public support for the first time – even among Russian speakers and residents who had previously disapproved of decommunization – and became part of the Ukrainian government's announced decolonization policies. On 14 March 2023, multiple non-governmental organizations and other groups signed a petition calling for the adoption of derussification laws. In response, the Ukrainian parliament passed on 21 March the law On the Condemnation and Prohibition of Propaganda of Russian Imperial Policy in Ukraine and the Decolonization of Toponymy, the country's first comprehensive derussification legislation, officially prohibiting placenames considered to promote Russian imperialism or the Russification of Ukraine. An official list of placenames not conforming to the Ukrainian language was published on 30 June 2023 by the National Commission on State Language Standards, followed on 3 August by a separate list from the Ukrainian Institute of National Memory of placenames associated with Russian imperialism. Local authorities of affected places were given six months from the publication of each list to submit new name proposals to parliament; localities that did not submit name proposals were renamed directly by parliament based on the Institute's or Commission's recommendations. For certain localities that have placenames that are potentially applicable to renaming, such as the village of Krasnopil in Zhytomyr Oblast, whose name is derived from the color red (a symbol of the Soviet Union) but also dates as early as 1601, name changes are not required.
As of 7 December 2025, multiple administrative divisions and hundreds of populated places have had their names changed or modified as part of derussification. Many of the name changes occurred on 26 September 2024 following the enactment of a major law formalizing new names for 327 populated places and four raions. Amongst the most common names replaced as part of derussification are those named for the color red, Russian test pilot Valery Chkalov, Soviet Russian author Maxim Gorky, Russian botanist Ivan Michurin, Moscow and other Russian cities, the first of May (celebrated as International Workers' Day), and Russian imperial general Alexander Suvorov. In addition, numerous placenames have had spelling and grammatical adjustments made to their legal names to match Ukrainian language standards, such as with over a dozen localities renamed from Yurivka (Ukrainian: Юр'ївка) to Yuriivka (Юріївка). Of currently existing administrative divisions, six raions and three urban districts have been affected by derussification post-independence, with the raions being renamed in response to the name changes of their namesake administrative centers. For populated places affected by derussification, most have been rural settlements and villages although 18 cities have also had name changes. Due to the ongoing Russian occupation of parts of Ukraine, the new names for populated places and administrative divisions located in occupied areas have only de jure status while de facto Russian-appointed officials continue to use their pre-derussification names.


== Administrative divisions ==


== Populated places ==


== See also ==
Decommunization in Ukraine
KyivNotKiev
List of renamed cities in Ukraine
Renaming of Crimean toponyms


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
"Закон України «Про засудження та заборону пропаганди російської імперської політики в Україні і деколонізацію топонімії»" [Law of Ukraine "On the Condemnation and Prohibition of Propaganda of Russian Imperial Policy in Ukraine and the Decolonization of Toponymy"]. zakon.rada.gov.ua (in Ukrainian). Verkhovna Rada. Retrieved 17 February 2025.
""Ударить по «рускому міру»: полтавець Тарас Шамайда про закон щодо заборони пропаганди російської імперської політики" ["This will strike at the "Russian world": Taras Shamayda from Poltava on the law prohibiting propaganda of Russian imperial policy]. suspilne.media (in Ukrainian). Public Broadcasting Company of Ukraine. 30 April 2023. Retrieved 17 February 2025.
"Фінал голосування за нову назву Первомайського на Харківщині: який топонім переміг" [Final voting for the new name of Pervomaiskyi in Kharkiv Oblast: which toponym won]. suspilne.media (in Ukrainian). Public Broadcasting Company of Ukraine. 25 April 2023. Retrieved 17 February 2025.
Ratsybarska, Yulia (14 May 2023). "Подалі від Москви. Як перейменують місто Новомосковськ на Дніпропетровщині?" [Farther from Moscow. How will the city of Novomoskovsk in Dnipropetrovsk Oblast be renamed?]. radiosvoboda.org (in Ukrainian). Radio Svoboda. Retrieved 17 February 2025.