There are 52 populated places in Donetsk Oblast, Ukraine, that have been officially granted city status (Ukrainian: місто, romanized: misto) by the Verkhovna Rada, the country's parliament. Settlements with more than 10,000 people are eligible for city status, although the status is typically also granted to settlements of historical or regional importance. As of 5 December 2001, the date of the first and only official census in the country since independence, the most populous city in the oblast was the regional capital, Donetsk, with a population of 1,016,194 people, while the least populous city was Sviatohirsk, with 5,136 people. The most recent settlement to receive city status is Mykolaivka, which was granted the status by the Verkhovna Rada on 18 November 2003.
From independence in 1991 to 2020, 28 cities in the oblast were designated as cities of regional significance (municipalities), which had self-government under city councils, while the oblast's remaining 24 cities were located in 18 raions (districts) as cities of district significance, which are subordinated to the governments of the raions. On 18 July 2020, an administrative reform abolished and merged the oblast's raions and cities of regional significance into eight new, expanded raions. The eight raions that make up the oblast are Bakhmut, Donetsk, Horlivka, Kalmiuske, Kramatorsk, Mariupol, Pokrovsk, and Volnovakha. After the enactment of decommunization laws, ten cities within the oblast were renamed in 2016 for their former names' connection to people, places, events, and organizations associated with the Soviet Union. The renamed cities are Bakhmut, Bunhe, Chystiakove, Kalmiuske, Khrestivka, Lyman, Myrnohrad, Pokrovsk, Toretsk, and Zalizne, which were previously named Artemivsk, Yunokomunarivsk, Torez, Komsomolske, Kirovske, Krasnyi Lyman, Dymytrov, Krasnoarmiisk, Dzerzhynsk, and Artemove, respectively.
Following the Donbas war, pro-Russian separatist forces controlled all 21 cities located in the Donetsk, Horlivka, and Kalmiuske raions by 2015. After 24 February 2022, during Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, an additional nineteen cities were occupied by Russian troops of which, Lyman and Sviatohirsk were recovered by Ukraine. For their contributions to the country's defense during the invasion, seven cities in the oblast were awarded with the honorary title Hero City of Ukraine: Mariupol and Volnovakha in 2022, and Druzhkivka, Kostiantynivka, Kramatorsk, Pokrovsk, and Sloviansk in 2025.


== List of cities ==


== See also ==
List of cities in Ukraine


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

2001 Ukrainian census, Population Structure (in Ukrainian)
"Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2021" [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of 1 January 2021] (PDF). db.ukrcensus.gov.ua (in Ukrainian and English). State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 May 2021.
Regions of Ukraine and their composition (in Ukrainian)
World Gazetteer: Cities of Ukraine at archive.today (archived 10 December 2012)