Tatyana Dmitrievna Bakhteyeva or Tetyana Dmytriyivna Bakhteyeva (born November 27, 1953) is a Doctor of Medical Sciences (since 2008), CEO of Donetsk Oblast Clinical Territorial Medical Association, former People's Deputy of Ukraine from 2019 to 2022.


== Early life and education ==
Tatyana Bakhteeva was born on November 27, 1953, in Donetsk, Ukraine. She is divorced, her ex-husband Alimzhan Bakhteev is working in bus transfer services. They have a daughter Irina Valitova (born in 1975), who is a teacher at Donetsk Medical University in Donetsk, Ukraine.
In 1977 Bakhteeva graduated from Donetsk Medical University as a GP.  In 2002, she also obtained a degree in Economics from the School of Economics named after Mikhail Tugan-Baranovsky. In 2002 she received her Ph.D. in medical sciences with the thesis "Neurotic disorders in women". Once she became a People's Deputy of Ukraine, she never returned to medicine.


== Early career ==

While completing her education, Bakhteeva was also employed. From 1977 until 1980 she worked as a therapist and physical therapist at the hospital No.2 at Yasinovataya station, Donetsk railway. From 1980 until 1991, Bakhteeva worked as a doctor. From 1986 until 1991, she was the Deputy Head of medical-labour expert commission at Donetsk city hospital No.3.
In 1991, Bakhteeva became the Head of Donetsk Regional radiological medical expert commission for Chernobyl liquidators. One year later in 1992, her responsibilities included working with children recovering from the Chernobyl Disaster in Cuba.
From 1994 through 1997, Bakhteva continued her work with the Chernobyl Disaster, as the Head Doctor at Donetsk Oblast, which is a health care center for individuals affected by the consequences of Chernobyl accident. In 1997, Bakhteeva became the CEO of Donetsk Oblast Clinical Territorial Medical Association.
Bakhteeva is the founder of the Donetsk Oblast charity foundation Humaneness and is highly regarded as an honored Doctor in Ukraine.


== Political career ==
In 1998, and until 2002, she was elected to be the Deputy of Donetsk Oblast Council and member of health committee for a term of five years.
From 2002 to 2019, Bakhteeva was a member of parliament. In May 2002, Bakhteeva was elected the People's Deputy of Ukraine from Party of Regions in the 2002 Ukrainian parliamentary election  on the election list of For United Ukraine!, a political party in Ukraine. She was then seated as a member of Party of Regions in the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th Verkhovna Radas in the National Party of Ukraine. In the 5th and 6th Verkhovna Radas, she took the post of Head of Health Care committee.
She was then seated in the 8th Verkhovna Rada for the political party known as Opposition Bloc.  In the 2014 Ukrainian parliamentary election, she was again re-elected into parliament; this time after placing 9th on the electoral list of Opposition Bloc.   Bakhteeva was also a:

Member of the Group of Interparliamentary Relations with Russia;
Member of the Interparliamentary relations with the Swiss Confederation;
Member of the Interparliamentary relations with the Principality of Liechtenstein;
Member of the Group of Interparliamentary Relations with the Republic of Lebanon;
Member of the Group of Interparliamentary Relations with the Republic of Kazakhstan; and,
Member of the Group of Interparliamentary Relations with Hellenic Republic.
After 2013, Bakhteeva was appointed to be the "People's Deputy of Ukraine," in the 8th convocation of Opposition Bloc. She was the Chairman of the Committee on Health Protection.
While serving in the above political positions, Bakhteeva regularly visited Donetsk and Donetsk People's Republic (DPR) for the last time in 2019. She helped promote the policy of reconciliation to Serhii Syvokho, an associate of President Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
In the 2019 Ukrainian parliamentary election she lost the election and was not re-elected into parliament; this time after placing 26th on the electoral list of a reformatted (and thus new) party known as the Opposition Bloc.
At the end of January 2020, a Ukrainian public organization Fellowship named Native Donbas was presented in Kyiv. Among the founders were Bakhteeva, as well as the ex-deputy head of the Donetsk Regional State Administration Boris Adamov, who is a multiple champion of the Paralympic Games in swimming. Co-founders also included honorary citizen of Donetsk and Sloviansk, Viktor Smirnov, and three former deputies including Bakhteeva herself, Valeriy Konovalyuk and the president of the Nord Holding Valentin Landik.
Until February 24 of 2022, Bakhteeva publicly stood for the "special status" of Donbas and against the economic blockade of territories temporarily not controlled by Ukraine.
Bakhteeva managed to get the biggest profits with the help of official powers from tenders together with the Fistal brothers. These are representatives of the Donetsk medical clan close to the Russian special services, whose patriarch is the surgeon of the Donetsk Burn Center, Emil Fistal. Fistals openly support the Russian occupation, registered their companies in the Russian economic space in Donetsk. At the same time, with the support of Bakhteeva, they continued to receive excess profits as "medical tender kings" of Ukraine. In just two years till the end of 2021, $440 mln passed through firms associated with Bakhteeva and the separatists Fistal family, of which up to 30% returned to the beneficiaries of the scheme as kickbacks.
In late 2021 she attended Yukhym Zvyahilsky's funeral.


== Critics ==
She is close to the businessman Rinat Akhmetov. She has friendly and family ties with the Taktashev and Valitov families, who are considered to be criminal operatives from the first circle of "Lord of Donbas." At one time, the partner of the Taktashovs, Valitovs, and Bakhteeva was Andriy Adamovskyi, who is known for the scandal surrounding the Skymall in Kyiv and was considered one of the most influential figures of the "half-world" of Poroshenko's time due to his friendship with ex-People's Deputy Alexandr Granovsky.
Bakhteeva's husband worked for Vladyslav Dreger, who is called a raider in the media. Dreger's path to success began with cooperation with the "17 Precinct" OZU, which is close to the Victor Pshonka family of prosecutors. Bakhteeva's nephew is Rinat Ayzyatulov.
Raisa Bohatyriova and Bakhteeva earned huge fortunes from their involvement in medicine, from the production and certification of medicines, and from the production, certification and recommendation of vaccines. They also profited from government Procurement, certification of state and private clinics and practices, management of pharmacy networks, supply of medical equipment and reagents, and from supporting the education of wealthy foreign students studying in medical universities located in Ukraine.
After the Orange Revolution in 2004, Bakhteeva cohabited with President Viktor Yushchenko's wife Kateryna Yushchenko, took part in the scandalous "Clinic of the Third Millennium" project.
Bakhteeva is also linked to the Glib Zagoriy clan, which is close to Poroshenko. Bogatyreva and Bakhteeva are considered to be the founders of pharmacy addiction (selling Tramadol and Tramalgin in pharmacies without a prescription). Tramadol is an opioid medicine and Tramalgin is a pain medication. Many of Bakhteeva's associates had ties to the same business. Tramadol and Tramalgin were produced in exorbitant volumes by Farmak (family of Pavlo Zhebrivskyi), Darnytsia Zagoriy, Stirol (Yankovskyi) in Horlovka, Biolik in Kharkiv. Stirol was considered the source of Bakhteeva's Tramadol profits.


== Award and honors ==
In 2010, Bakhteeva was ranked No.7 on the 100 most influential Ukrainian women list published by Ukrainian magazine Focus.

Order of Princess Olga, III class (2002)
"Miner's Glory" badge, I, II, III class
Order of Saint Barbara, given by Ukrainian Orthodox Church
Certificate of Merit "For Humanism" from the President of Ukraine
Certificate of Merit from Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine (2003)


== See also ==
2007 Ukrainian parliamentary election
List of Ukrainian Parliament Members 2007
Verkhovna Rada


== References ==


== External links ==
Tatyana Bakhteeva's profile at Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine official web-site