Ukraine used to attract more than 20 million foreign citizens every year (23 million in 2012). But since 2014 this has lowered to about 10 million. Visitors primarily come from Eastern Europe, but also from Western Europe, as well as Turkey and Israel.

Before the Russo-Ukrainian War, Ukraine occupied 8th place in Europe by the number of tourists visiting, according to the World Tourism Organization rankings. Ukraine has numerous tourist attractions: mountain ranges suitable for skiing, hiking and fishing: the Black Sea coastline as a popular summer destination; nature reserves of different ecosystems; churches, castle ruins and other architectural and park landmarks; various outdoor activity points. Kyiv, Lviv, Odesa and Kamyanets-Podilskyi were Ukraine's principal tourist centres each offering many historical landmarks as well as formidable hospitality infrastructure. Tourism used to be the mainstay of Crimea's economy, but there was a major fall in visitor numbers following the Russian annexation in 2014.
The Seven Wonders of Ukraine and Seven Natural Wonders of Ukraine are the selection of the most important landmarks of Ukraine, chosen by the general public through an Internet-based vote.
Ukraine is a destination on the crossroads between central and eastern Europe, between north and south. It borders Russia and is not far from Turkey. It has mountain ranges – the Carpathian Mountains suitable for skiing, hiking, fishing and hunting. The coastline on the Black Sea is a popular summer destination for vacationers. Ukraine has vineyards where they produce native wines, ruins of ancient castles, historical parks, Orthodox, Catholic and Protestant churches as well as a few mosques and synagogues. Kyiv, the country's capital city has many unique structures such as Saint Sophia Cathedral and broad boulevards. There are other cities well known to tourists, such as the harbour town Odesa and the old city of Lviv in the west. Most of Western Ukraine, which used to be within the borders of the Republic of Poland before World War II, is a popular destination for Poles. Crimea, a little "continent" of its own, had been a popular vacation destination for tourists for swimming or sun tanning on the Black Sea with its warm climate, rugged mountains, plateaus and ancient ruins, though the tourist trade has been severely affected by Russia's occupation and annexation of the territory in 2014. Cities there include: Sevastopol and Yalta – location of the peace conference at the end of World War II. Visitors can also take cruise tours by ship on the Dnieper River from Kyiv to the Black Sea coastline. Ukrainian cuisine has a long history and offers a wide variety of original dishes.
The country's tourism industry is generally considered to be underdeveloped, but it does provide crucial support for Ukraine's economy. Ukraine does have certain advantages, including much lower costs than other European destinations, as well as visa-free access for most people from Europe, the former Soviet Union, and North America. Since 2005 citizens of European Union and EFTA, United States, Canada, Japan and South Korea no longer require a visa to visit Ukraine for tourism purposes. Additionally, no visa is required from most countries of the former Soviet Union with the exceptions of Russia and Turkmenistan.


== Popular tourist city destinations ==


=== Central Ukraine ===

Main cities

Kyiv – the historical capital of Kievan Rus' and modern Ukraine on the Dnieper River. Ancient churches, broad boulevards, beautiful landscapes and a variety of cultural facilities make it a popular destination.
Chernihiv – ancient city of Kievan Rus', one of the oldest cities in Ukraine, has lots of Medieval architecture. Some of the oldest human settlements in Europe have also been discovered in the area.
Pereiaslav – "living museum", one of the biggest historic and ethnographic reserves in Ukraine. There are over 20 different museums, and the city hosts various exhibitions and fairs.
Vinnytsia – the largest city in the historic region of Podillia. Houses the largest floating fountain in Europe, built on the Southern Bug River near Festyvalnyi Isle.
Sumy – city's history started in the mid-17th century.
Uman – known for its arboretum and being the site of Rosh Hashana kibbutz.
Poltava – a common destination for culinary and cultural tourism.
Novhorod-Siverskyi – historic city known for its churches.
Chyhyryn and Baturyn – former capitals of the Cossack Hetmanate with sites of the Cossack era.
Kropyvnytskyi - known for the fortress of St. Elizabeth - one of the few earthen forts from the XVIII century that have survived in Europe, and an architectural heritage in the style of neoclassicism.


=== Western Ukraine ===

Lviv – old city in the west of country, with its medieval old town and unique architecture with Polish and Austrian influences. The top tourist destination in Ukraine, when it comes to architecture and culture.
Ivano-Frankivsk – western Ukrainian city that was recognized as the best city to live in Ukraine.
Chernivtsi – the capital of Bukovina offers Balkan atmosphere and fine classical Habsburg architecture in Central-European style, as it was part of Austrian empire (prior to 1918).
Uzhhorod – the capital of Transcarpathia, one of the oldest cities in Ukraine. It attracts tourists because of its proximity to the Carpathian Mountains.
Mukachevo – a major city of Transcarpathia, especially known for its castle.
Kamianets-Podilskyi – a historic city surrounded by the Smotrych River canyon. It is well known for its castle.
Ternopil – a historic city known for its pond.
Lutsk – the post-Mongol capital of Volhynia, known for its castle.
Drohobych – known for its historic centre and the wooden church.
Halych – the Rus'-era capital of Galicia which migrated to the north and developed into a new city from 14th century, forming a historic complex with neighboring villages.
Khotyn – known for its 13th–17th century fortress, the city is a common stop on the Chernivtsi–Kamianets-Podilskyi tourist route.
Pochaiv and Kremenets – neighboring historic cities the sites of which are united under one national historic and architectural reserve. The highlights are Pochaiv Lavra and Saint Ignatius Church accordingly.
Golden Horseshoe of Lviv Oblast – a tourist route which includes various castles in Lviv Oblast, such as Olesko, Pidhirtsi, Zolochiv, Svirzh, and sometimes also Zhovkva, Pomoriany, and Stare Selo castles.


=== Eastern Ukraine ===

Kharkiv – city's history started in the mid-17th century, when the Cossacks created the Sloboda settlements; and since then, the city has turned into one of the largest commercial, cultural and educational centers in Ukraine with a population of over 1.7 million people. From December 1919 to June 1934, Kharkiv was the capital of Soviet Ukraine, with Derzhprom being the highlight of the era. The Ukrainian cultural renaissance commenced here in the years 1920–1930.
Sviatohirsk – known for its monastery on hills.
Bakhmut – site of multiple historic buildings until their destruction during the Battle of Bakhmut.
Donetsk
Luhansk


=== Southern Ukraine ===

Odesa – a harbor city on the Black Sea with a mixture of different cultures, including Jewish, Armenian, German, Russian and Greek cultures along with the native Ukrainian culture. Odesa is a Black Sea resort and the largest trading center of Ukraine.
Zaporizhzhia – the sixth largest city in Ukraine, famous for Khortytsia Island, DniproHES and Sotsmisto (Socialist city) neighborhood.
Dnipro – the fourth largest city in Ukraine.
Izmail – a historic town on the Danube River in Odesa Oblast of south-western Ukraine.
Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi – one of the oldest cities in Ukraine, dating back to the ancient Greek colony of Tyras.
Sevastopol – a port city known for the ruins of Chersonesos Taurica, an ancient Greek settlement (currently under administration of the Russian Federation).
Bakhchysarai – the traditional capital of Crimean Tatars, known for its palace and cave town (currently under administration of the Russian Federation).
Kerch – among the oldest cities in Ukraine, with buildings and structures of ancient Greek, Byzantine, Ottoman, Imperial Russian, and Soviet eras (currently under administration of the Russian Federation).
Crimean Southern Coast (Crimean Riviera) – the coastline of Yalta and Alushta municipalities which covers many resort towns, especially known for the nature and palaces (currently under administration of the Russian Federation).


== Landscapes ==
Carpathian Mountains – impressive mountain landscapes with skiing and hiking possibilities, spas with cold and hot springs. Ski resorts include Bukovel, Slavsko, Verkhovyna, Vorokhta.
Hoverla – the highest mountain in Ukraine. Hiking.
Azov coast – bathing resorts.
Dnieper – cruises.
Dniester – canoeing, boat sailing.
Southern Bug – rafting, ecotourism.
Shatsk Lakes – bathing, camping, hiking.
Sofiyivka Park, located in Uman.
Waterfalls of Ukraine – ecotourism.


=== Seven Wonders of Ukraine ===

The Seven Wonders of Ukraine are the seven historical and cultural monuments of Ukraine, which were chosen in the Seven Wonders of Ukraine contest held in July 2007.

Sofiyivka Park in Uman, Cherkasy Oblast
Kyiv Pechersk Lavra (Monastery of the Caves)
Kamianets-Podilskyi Historical Complex in Kamianets-Podilskyi, Khmelnytskyi Oblast
Khortytsia in Zaporizhzhia, Zaporizhzhia Oblast
Chersonesus in Sevastopol
Saint Sophia Cathedral, Kyiv
Khotyn Fortress in Khotyn, Chernivtsi Oblast


=== Seven natural wonders of Ukraine ===

Winners of all Ukraine competition Seven natural wonders of Ukraine:

Askania-Nova near Askania-Nova, Kherson Oblast
Granite-steppe lands of Buh in Mykolaiv Oblast
Dniester Canyon, Dnister
Marble Cave (Crimea)
Podillian Tovtry in Khmelnytskyi Oblast
Lake Svitiaz, part of a group of lakes near Shatsk, Volyn Oblast
Lake Synevyr near village of Synevyrska Poliana in Carpathian Mountains


=== Recognized World Heritage sites ===

Kyiv: Saint Sophia Cathedral and Related Monastic Buildings, Kyiv Pechersk Lavra
L'viv – the Ensemble of the Historic Centre (Old Town, Pidzamche and St. George's Cathedral)
Residence of Bukovinian and Dalmatian Metropolitans in Chernivtsi
Ancient City of Tauric Chersonese and its Chora in Sevastopol
Segments of the Struve Geodetic Arc (at Staro-Nekrasivka, Baranivka, Felshtyn, and Katerynivka)
Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests in Ukrainian Carpathians, Roztochchia and Satanivska Dacha.
Wooden tserkvas of the Carpathian Region
The Historic Centre of Odesa


== Medical tourism ==
Lately many modern dental clinics with high quality dentistry equipment and high quality materials have been established in Ukraine. They provide patients with high quality dentistry services for prices much cheaper in comparison with Western and Russian clinics. Many tourists from United States, European Union and Russia arrive for dental services, providing a sort of dental tourism.
Other popular sorts of medical tourism in Ukraine are spas, eye and plastic surgery, hair transplants, and mud baths.
Truskavets and Myrhorod are well known for their mineral springs.


== Religious tourism ==
Uman is a pilgrimage site for Breslov Hasidic Jews, especially on Rosh Hashana kibbutz.
Saint Sophia Cathedral and Kyiv Pechersk Lavra in Kyiv are sites of Eastern Orthodox pilgrimage.


== Events ==


=== Festival culture ===

In recent years a variety of festivals emerged in major Ukrainian cities. Among the most popular are international jazz festival in Lviv, street food festival in Kyiv, various summer festivals in Odesa—a popular tourist destination in summer. Many of these festivals take place in former industrial buildings of the Soviet era and are thus helping to rejuvenate these areas.


=== Trade fairs ===


== Governing body of tourist industry and its chairs ==
Main Directorate of Foreign Tourism (at the Government of the Ukrainian SSR and part of the Soviet Goskominturist)
1964–74 Yosyp Zatyahan
1974–89 Viktor Dobrotvor
Ukrintur Association
1989–93 Volodymyr Skrynnyk
State Committee of Ukraine on tourism
1993–96 Volodymyr Skrynnyk
1997–98 Anatoliy Kasianenko
1998–2000 Valeriy Tsybukh
State Department of Tourism (State Committee of Youth Policy, Sport and Tourism)
2001–02 Anatoliy Matviyenko
State Tourist Administration of Ukraine
2002–05 Valeriy Tsybukh
State Service of Tourism and Resorts (Ministry of Culture and Tourism)
2005–06 Ihor Prystavskyi
2006–10 Anatoliy Pakhlya
State Agency of Ukraine on Tourism and Resorts (Ministry of Infrastructure)
2011–14 Olena Shapovalova
Department (Directorate) of Tourism and Resorts (Ministry of Economic Development and Trade)
2016–17 Ivan Liptuha
2018–2019 Oksana Serdyuk
State Agency for Tourism Development of Ukraine (Ministry of Сulture and Іnformation Policy of Ukraine)
2019–present Mariana Oleskiv


== Foreign travel statistics ==

Most visitors arriving in Ukraine were from the following countries of nationality:

Number of foreign citizens visiting Ukraine (from 2014, excluding Crimea)
Statistics are based on data from the State Statistics Agency of Ukraine.

2000: 6.4 million
2001: 9.2 million
2002: 10.5 million
2003: 12.5 million
2004: 15.6 million
2005: 17.6 million
2006: 18.9 million
2007: 23.1 million
2008: 25.4 million
2009: 20.8 million
2010: 21.2 million
2011: 21.4 million
2012: 23.0 million
2013: 24.7 million
2014: 12.7 million
2015: 12.4 million
2016: 13.3 million
2017: 14.2 million


== Gallery ==


== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official Tourism Portal in Ukraine