The Russian census identified that there were more than 5,864,000 Ukrainians living in Russia  in 2015, representing over 4.01% of the total population of the Russian Federation and comprising the eighth-largest ethnic group. In February 2022 there were roughly 3 million Ukrainians who fled to Russia as refugees. Most of them identified as ethnic Russians. The number kept increasing throughout the war. Estimates for Ukrainians fleeing towards Russia range from 3 to 10 million.
In February 2014, there were 2.6 million Ukrainian citizens in the territory of Russia, two-thirds of the labour migrants; however, after Russia annexed Crimea and started the war in Donbas, the number was estimated to have risen to 4.5 million.


== History ==


=== 17th and 18th centuries ===
The Treaty of Pereiaslav of 1654 led to Ukraine becoming a protectorate of the Tsardom of Russia. This resulted in increased Ukrainian immigration to Russia, initially to Sloboda Ukraine but also to the Don lands and the area of the Volga river. There was a significant migration to Moscow, particularly by church activists, priests and monks, scholars and teachers, artists, translators, singers, and merchants. In 1652, twelve singers under the direction of Ternopolsky moved to Moscow, and thirteen graduates of the Kyiv-Mohyla Collegium moved to teach the Moscow gentry. Many priests and church administrators migrated from Ukraine; in particular, Ukrainian clergy established the Andreyevsky Monastery, which influenced the Russian Orthodox Church, in particular the reform policies of Patriarch Nikon which led to the Old Believer Raskol (English: schism). The influence of Ukrainian clergy continued to grow, especially after 1686, when the Metropolia of Kyiv was transferred from the Patriarch of Constantinople to the Patriarch of Moscow.
After the abolishment of the Patriarch's chair by Peter I, Ukrainian Stephen Yavorsky became Metropolitan of Moscow, followed by Feofan Prokopovich. Five Ukrainians were metropolitans, and 70 of 127 bishops in Russia's Orthodox hierarchy were recent emigres from Kyiv. Students of the Kyiv-Mohyla Collegium began schools and seminaries in many Russian eparchies. By 1750, over 125 such institutions were opened, and their graduates practically controlled the Russian church, obtaining key posts through to the late 18th century. Under Prokopovich, the Russian Academy of Sciences was opened in 1724, which was chaired from 1746 by Ukrainian Kirill Razumovsky.
The Moscow court had a choir established in 1713 with 21 singers from Ukraine. The conductor for a period of time was A. Vedel. In 1741, 44 men, 33 women, and 55 girls were moved to St. Petersburg from Ukraine to sing and entertain. Composer Maksym Berezovsky also worked in St. Petersburg at the time. A significant Ukrainian presence was also seen in the Academy of Arts.
The Ukrainian presence in the Russian Army also grew significantly. The greatest influx happened after the Battle of Poltava in 1709. Large numbers of Ukrainians settled around St. Petersburg and were employed in the building of the city.
A separate category of emigrants were those deported to Moscow by the Russian government for demonstrating anti-Russian sentiment. The deported were brought to Moscow initially for investigation, then exiled to Siberia, Arkhangelsk or the Solovetsky Islands. Among the deported were Ukrainian cossacks including D. Mhohohrishny, Ivan Samoylovych, and Petro Doroshenko. Others include all the family of hetman Ivan Mazepa, A. Vojnarovsky, and those in Mazepa's Cossack forces that returned to Russia. Some were imprisoned in exile for the rest of their lives, such as hetman Pavlo Polubotok, Pavlo Holovaty, P. Hloba and Petro Kalnyshevsky.


=== 19th century ===

Beginning in the 19th century, there was a continuous migration from Belarus, Ukraine and Northern Russia to settle the distant areas of the Russian Empire. The promise of free fertile land was an important factor for many peasants, who until 1861 lived under serfdom. In the colonization of the new lands, a significant contribution was made by ethnic Ukrainians. Initially Ukrainians colonised border territories in the Caucasus. Most of these settlers came from Left-bank Ukraine and Slobozhanshchyna and mainly settled in the Stavropol and Terek areas. Some compact areas of the Don, Volga, and Urals were also settled.
The Ukrainians created large settlements within Russia, becoming the majority in certain centres. They continued fostering their traditions, their language, and their architecture. Their village structure and administration differed somewhat from the Russian population that surrounded them. Where populations were mixed, Russification often took place. The size and geographical area of the Ukrainian settlements were first seen in the course of the Russian Empire Census of 1897, which noted language but not ethnicity. A total of 22,380,551 Ukrainian speakers were recorded, with 1,020,000 Ukrainians in European Russia and 209,000 in Asian Russia.


=== Formation of Ukrainian borders ===

The first Russian Empire Census, conducted in 1897, gave statistics regarding language use in the Russian Empire according to the administrative borders. Extensive use of Little Russian (and in some cases dominance) was noted in the nine south-western Governorates and the Kuban Oblast. When the future borders of the Ukrainian state were marked, the results of the census were taken into consideration. As a result, the ethnographic borders of Ukraine in the 20th century were twice as large as the Cossack Hetmanate that had been incorporated into the Russian Empire in the 18th century.
Certain regions had mixed populations made up of both Ukrainian and Russian ethnicities, and various minorities. These included the territory of Sloboda and the Donbas. These territories were between Ukraine and Russia. This left a large community of ethnic Ukrainians on the Russian side of the border. The borders of the short-lived Ukrainian People's Republic were largely preserved by the Ukrainian SSR.
In the course of the mid-1920s administrative reforms, some territory initially under the Ukrainian SSR was ceded to the Russian SFSR, such as the Taganrog and Shakhty cities in the eastern Donbas. At the same time, the Ukrainian SSR gained several territories that were amalgamated into the Sumy Oblast in Sloboda region.


=== Late 20th century and early 21st century ===

The Ukrainian cultural renaissance in Russia began at the end of the 1980s, with the formation of the Slavutych Society in Moscow and the Ukrainian Cultural Centre named after T. Shevchenko in Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg).
In 1991, the Ukraina Society organized a conference in Kyiv with delegates from the various new Ukrainian community organizations of the Eastern Diaspora. By 1991, over 20 such organizations were in existence. By 1992, 600 organizations were registered in Russia alone. The congress helped to consolidate the efforts of these organizations. From 1992, regional congresses began to take place, organized by the Ukrainian organizations of Prymoria, Tyumen Oblast, Siberia and the Far East. In March 1992, the Union of Ukrainian organizations in Moscow was founded. The Union of Ukrainians in Russia was founded in May 1992.
The term "Eastern Diaspora" has been used since 1992 to describe Ukrainians living in the former USSR, as opposed to the Western Ukrainian Diaspora which was used until then to describe all Ukrainian diaspora outside the Union. The Eastern Diaspora is estimated to number approximately 6.8 million, while the Western Diaspora is estimated to number approximately 5 million.
In February 2009, about 3.5 million Ukrainian citizens were estimated to be working in the Russian Federation, particularly in Moscow and in the construction industry. According to Volodymyr Yelchenko, the Ambassador of Ukraine to the Russian Federation, there were no state schools in Russia with a program for teaching school subjects in the Ukrainian language as of August 2010; he considered "the correction of this situation" as one of his top priorities.
As of 2007, the number of Ukrainian illegal immigrants in Russia has been estimated as being between 3 and 11 million.
In a 2011 poll, 49% of Ukrainians said that they had relatives living in Russia.


=== Russo-Ukrainian War ===
During the Russo-Ukrainian War that began in 2014, some Ukrainians living in Russia have complained of being labelled a "Banderite" (follower of Stepan Bandera), even when they are from parts of Ukraine where Stephan Bandera has no considerable support.
Starting from 2014, a number of Ukrainian activists and organisations were prosecuted in Russia based on political grounds. Some notable examples include the case of Oleg Sentsov, which was described by Amnesty International as a "Stalinist era trial", the closure of a Ukrainian library in Moscow and prosecution of the library staff, and a ban of Ukrainian organisations in Russia, such as Ukrainian World Congress.
As of September 2015, there were 2.6 million Ukrainians living in Russia, more than half of them classified as "guest workers". A million more had arrived in the previous eighteen months (although critics have accused the FMS and media of circulating exaggerated figures). About 400,000 had applied for refugee status and almost 300,000 had asked for temporary residence status, with another 600,000 considered to be in breach of migration rules. By November 2017, there were 427,240 applicant asylum-seekers and refugees from Ukraine registered in Russia, over 185,000 of them having received temporary asylum, and fewer than 590 with refugee status. The refugees were from the territories of Donetsk People's Republic and Luhansk People's Republics taken over by pro-Russian separatists since the Russo-Ukrainian War. Most refugees have headed to rural areas in central Russia. Major destinations for Ukrainian migrants have included Karelia, Vorkuta, Magadan Oblast; oblasts such as Magadan and Yakutia are destinations of a government relocation program since the vast majority avoid big cities like Moscow and Saint Petersburg.
During the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, an estimated 2.8 million Ukrainians had arrived in Russia as of September 2022; the UN Human Rights Office stated: "There have been credible allegations of forced transfers of unaccompanied children to Russian occupied territory, or to the Russian Federation itself."
On 22 January 2024 Volodymyr Zelenskyy, the president of Ukraine, has signed a presidential decree "On areas of the Russian Federation historically populated by Ukrainians", urging the Ukrainian government to take measures to "preserve the national identity of Ukrainians in Russia", "counter misinformation regarding the history and present of Ukrainians in Russia" and "develop relations between Ukrainians and other peoples enslaved by Russia".


== Ukrainian population centres in Russia ==


=== Kuban ===

The original Black Sea Cossacks colonised the Kuban region from 1792. Following the Caucasus War and the subsequent colonisation of the Circaucasus, the Black Sea Cossacks intermixed with other ethnic groups, including the indigenous Circassian population.
According to the 1897 census, 47.3% of the Kuban population (including extensive latter 19th-century non-Cossack migrants from both Ukraine and Russia) referred to their native language as Little Russian (the official term for the Ukrainian language), while 42.6% referred to their native language as Great Russian. Few оf the cultural production in Kuban from the 1890s until 1914, such as plays, stories and music, were written in the Ukrainian language, and one of the first political parties in Kuban was the Ukrainian Revolutionary Party. During the Russian Civil War, the Kuban Cossack Rada formed a military alliance with the Ukrainian People's Republic and declared Ukrainian to be the official language of the Kuban National Republic. This decision was not supported uniformly by the Cossacks themselves, and soon the Rada itself was dissolved by the Russian White Denikin's Volunteer Army.
In the 1920s, a policy of Decossackization was pursued. At the same time, the Bolshevik authorities supported policies that promoted the Ukrainian language and self-identity, opening 700 Ukrainian-language schools and a Ukrainian department in the local university. Russian historians claim that Cossacks were in this way forcibly Ukrainized, while Ukrainian historians claim that Ukrainization in Kuban merely paralleled Ukrainization in Ukraine itself, where people were being taught in their native language. According to the 1926 census, there were nearly a million Ukrainians registered in the Kuban Okrug alone (or 62% of the total population). During this period many Soviet repressions were tested on the Cossack lands, particularly the Black Boards that led to the Soviet famine of 1932–1934 in the Kuban. Yet by the mid-1930s there was an abrupt policy change of Soviet attitude towards Ukrainians in Russia. In the Kuban, the Ukrainization policy was halted and reversed. In 1936 the Kuban Cossack Chorus was re-formed as were individual Cossack regiments in the Red Army. By the end of the 1930s many Cossacks' descendants chose to identify themselves as Russians. From that time onwards, almost all of the self-identified Ukrainians in the Kuban were non-Cossacks; the Soviet Census of 1989 showed that a total of 251,198 people in Krasnodar Kray (including Adyghe Autonomous Oblast) were born in the Ukrainian SSR. In the 2002 census, the number of people who identified as Ukrainians in the Kuban was recorded to be 151,788. Despite the fact that most of the descendants of Kuban Cossacks identify themselves as Russian nationals. Many elements of their culture originate from Ukraine, such as the Kuban Bandurist music, and the Balachka dialect.


=== Moscow ===
Moscow has had a significant Ukrainian presence since the 17th century. The original Ukrainian settlement bordered Kitai-gorod.  No longer having a Ukrainian character, it is today known as Maroseyka (a corruption of Malorusseyka, or Little Russian). During Soviet times the main street, Maroseyka, was named after the Ukrainian Cossack hetman Bohdan Khmelnytsky. After Moscow State University was founded in 1755, many students from Ukraine studied there. Many of these students had commenced their studies at the Kyiv-Mohyla Academy.
In the first years after the revolution of 1905, Moscow was one of the major centres of the Ukrainian movement for self-awareness. The monthly magazine Zoria (Зоря, English: Star) was edited by A. Krymsky, and from 1912 to 1917 the Ukrainian cultural and literary magazine Ukrainskaya zhizn was also published there (edited by Symon Petliura). Books in the Ukrainian language were published in Moscow from 1912 and Ukrainian theatrical troupes of M. Kropovnytsky and M. Sadovsky were constantly performing in Moscow.
Moscow's Ukrainians played an active role in opposing the attempted coup in August 1991.
According to the 2001 census, there are 253,644 Ukrainians living in the city of Moscow, making them the third-largest ethnic group in that city after Russians and Tatars. A further 147,808 Ukrainians live in the Moscow region. The Ukrainian community in Moscow operates a cultural centre on Arbat Street, whose head is appointed by the Ukrainian government. It publishes two Ukrainian-language newspapers and has organized Ukrainian-language Saturday and Sunday schools.


=== Saint Petersburg ===
When Saint Petersburg was the capital during the Russian Empire era, it attracted people from many nations including Ukraine. The Ukrainian poets Taras Shevchenko and Dmytro Bortniansky spent most of their lives in Saint Petersburg. Ivan Mazepa, carrying out the orders of Peter I, was responsible for sending many Ukrainians to help build St Petersburg.
According to the 2001 census, there are 87,119 Ukrainians living in the city of St Petersburg, where they constitute the largest non-Russian ethnic group. The former mayor, Valentina Matviyenko (née Tyutina), was born in Khmelnytskyi Oblast of western Ukraine and is of Ukrainian ethnicity.


=== Green Ukraine ===

Green Ukraine is often referred to as Zeleny Klyn. This is an area of land settled by Ukrainians which is a part of Far Eastern Siberia, located on the Amur River and the Pacific Ocean. It was named by Ukrainian settlers. The territory consists of over 1,000,000 square kilometres (390,000 sq mi) and had a population of 3.1 million in 1958.
Ukrainians made up 26% of the population in 1926.  In the last Russian census, 94,058 people in Primorsky Krai claimed Ukrainian ethnicity, making Ukrainians the second-largest ethnic group and largest ethnic minority.


=== Grey Ukraine ===

The Ukrainian settlement of Grey Ukraine or Siry Klyn (literally the "grey wedge") developed around the city of Omsk in western Siberia. M. Bondarenko, an emigrant from Poltava province, wrote before World War I: "The city of Omsk looks like a typical Moscovite city, but the bazaar and markets speak Ukrainian". All around the city of Omsk stood Ukrainian villages. The settlement of people beyond the Ural mountains began in the 1860s. There were attempts to form an autonomous Ukrainian region in 1917–1920. Altogether, 1,604,873 emigrants from Ukraine settled the area before 1914.  According to the 2010 Russian census, 77,884 people of the Omsk region identified themselves as Ukrainians, making Ukrainians the third-largest ethnic group there after Russians and Kazakhs.


=== Yellow Ukraine ===

The settlement of Yellow Ukraine, or Zholty Klyn (the Yellow Wedge) was founded soon after the Treaty of Pereyaslav of 1659 as the eastern border of the second Zasechnaya Cherta. Named after the yellow steppes on the middle and lower Volga, the colony co-existed with the Volga Cossacks, and colonists primarily settled around the city of Saratov. In addition to Ukrainians, Volga Germans and Mordovians migrated to Zholty Klyn in large numbers. As of 2014, most of the population is integrated throughout the region, though a few culturally Ukrainian villages remain.


== Inter-ethnic relations ==

Ukrainians in the Russian Federation represent the third-largest ethnic group after Russians and Tatars. In spite of their relatively high numbers, some Ukrainians in Russia reported unfair treatment and anti-Ukrainian sentiment in the Russian Federation. In November 2010, the High Court of Russia cancelled registration of one of the biggest civic communities of the Ukrainian minority, the "Federal nation-cultural autonomy of the Ukrainians in Russia" (FNCAUR).
A survey, conducted by the independent Russian research centre Levada in February 2019, found that 77% of Ukrainians and 82% of Russians think positively of each other as people.


== Demographics ==


=== Statistics and scholarship ===

Statistical information about Ukrainians is included in the census materials of the Russian Empire, the Soviet Union and the Russian Federation which were collected in 1897, 1920, 1923, 1926, 1937, 1939, 1959, 1970, 1979, 1989, 2002 and 2010. Of these, the 1937 census was discarded and begun again as the 1939 census.
In the aftermath of the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991, attention has been focused on the Eastern Ukrainian diaspora by the Society for relations with Ukrainians outside of Ukraine. Numerous attempts have been made to unite them. The society publishes the journal Zoloti Vorota (Золоті Ворота, named for The Golden Gate of Kyiv) and the magazine Ukrainian Diaspora.


=== Religion ===
The vast majority of Ukrainians in Russia are adherents of the Russian Orthodox Church. The Ukrainian clergy had an influential role on Russian Orthodoxy in the 17th and 18th centuries.
Recently, the growing economic migrant population from Galicia have had success in establishing a few Ukrainian Catholic churches, and there are several churches belonging to the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Kyiv Patriarchate), where Patriarch Filaret agreed to accept breakaway groups that had been excommunicated by the Russian Orthodox Church for breaches of canon law. In 2002, some asserted that Russian bureaucracy imposed on religion has hampered the expansion of these two groups. According to the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church, their denomination has only one church building in all of Russia.


=== Trends ===

During the 1990s, the Ukrainian population in Russia noticeably decreased due to a number of factors. The most important one was the general population decline in Russia. At the same time, many economic migrants from Ukraine moved to Russia for better paid jobs and careers. It is estimated that there are as many as 300,000 legally registered migrants. There is negative sentiment toward the bulk of migrants from the Caucasus and Central Asia, with Ukrainians relatively trusted by the Russian population. Assimilation has also been a factor in the falling number of Ukrainians; many intermarry with Russians, due to cultural similarities, and their children are counted as Russian on the census. Otherwise, the Ukrainian population has mostly remained stable due to immigration from Ukraine.


== Notable Ukrainians in Russia ==

Marina Ovsyannikova (Tkachuk) – journalist who was employed on the Channel One Russia TV channel
Kateryna Desnytska - Ukrainian-born nurse who became a princess as wife of the Siamese prince Chakrabongse Bhuvanath. She was a participant in the Russo-Japanese War and was awarded the Cross of St. George (1904)
Vasily Lanovoy, actor who worked in the Vakhtangov Theatre, was also known as the President of Artek Festival of Films for Children
Bogdan Stashinsky, a former KGB officer and spy who assassinated the Ukrainian nationalist leaders Lev Rebet and Stepan Bandera in the late 1950s
Stanislav Levchenko (born 1941), Russian KGB major and defector to the United States
Fedor Glushchenko - conductor and violinist
Vlad Lisovets – stylist, hair stylist, designer and host
Ruslan Karpuk (Leviev) - opposition activist, military analyst and founder of the investigative group Conflict Intelligence Team.
Ulyana Sergeenko - fashion designer
Vladimir Kiriyenko - business executive
Vyacheslav Krasko - traveler, manager and financier
Zinaida Kiriyenko - actress and singer
Aleksandr Naumenko (singer) - operatic tenor, vocal coach and composer
Mike Naumenko - Soviet musician
Olga Pashchenko- musician
Olga Naumenko - actress
Zinaida Sharko - actress
Nadezhda Kurchenko - Soviet flight attendant involved in the hijacking of Aeroflot Flight 244
Victor Kravchenko (defector) - Soviet defector
Nelly Korniyenko - Soviet actress
Irina Miroshnichenko - Soviet film and theatre actress, People's Artist of the RSFSR (1988)
Alex Kravchenko - professional poker player
Semyon Tsvigun – officer of the Soviet security police (KGB) whose sudden and unexplained death heralded a major shift in Kremlin power politics.
Viktor Medvedchuk – Ukrainian opposition politician. Born in Pochet, Krasnoyarsk Krai, Russian SFSR.Vladimir Putin is the godfather of Medvedchuk's daughter Daryna (born in 2004)
Yury Kovalchuk – billionaire businessman and financier who is "reputed to be Vladimir Putin's personal banker"
Gennady Timchenko – oligarch and billionaire businessman
Galina Timchenko - journalist
Sergey Samsonenko - businessman
Artemy Tereshchenko, entrepreneur, land-owner, pioneer of sugar production in the Russian Empire
Simon Tereshchenko, entrepreneur, son of Artemy.
Varvara Khanenko (née Tereshchenko, 1848–1922), noted art collector alongside her husband Bogdan Khanenko
Ivan Tereshchenko (1854–1903), collector and patron of the arts.
Oleg Boyko - international investor and resides in Switzerland, Chairman of Finstar Financial Group
Oksana Antonenko - economist
Yury Yaremenko - Soviet economist
Elena Kostyuchenko - journalist and activist
Sergei Kukharenko - political and public activist
Maxim Shevchenko – an editor, journalist and presenter on television and radio, one of the leading Russian journalists and experts on ethno-cultural and religious policies
Maxim Kononenko - journalist, writer and TV show host
Anatoly Lysenko - television figure, journalist, director, producer
Victoria Danilchenko - lawyer and TV presenter
Nikolay Andrushchenko - journalist
Petro Osypenko - Soviet public prosecutor
Sergey Tereshchenko – Prime Minister of Kazakhstan (1991–1994). He was born in an ethnic Ukrainian family in the town of Lesozavodsk, which was in the Primorsky Krai Region of the RSFSR
Innocent of Irkutsk – missionary to Siberia and the first bishop of Irkutsk in Russia
Joasaph of Belgorod – Russian Orthodox hierarch, bishop of Belgorod from 1748 until his death
John of Tobolsk – Metropolitan of Tobolsk
Saint John of Shanghai and San Francisco – prominent Eastern Orthodox ascetic and hierarch of the Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia (ROCOR) who was active in the mid-20th century
Arsenius (Matseyevich) – metropolitan of Rostov and Yaroslavl who protested against the confiscation of the church's land by Empress Catherine II in 1764
Dimitry of Rostov – leading opponent of the Caesaropapist reform of the Russian Orthodox church promoted by Feofan Prokopovich.
Ivan Zaporozhets – Soviet security officer and official of the OGPU-NKVD who was suspected of being involved in the assassination of Sergei Kirov in Leningrad in December 1934
Roman Rudenko – Procurator General of the Soviet Union (1953–1981). He is well known internationally for acting as chief prosecutor for the USSR at the 1946 trial of the major Nazi war criminals in Nuremberg.
Arkady Babchenko – print and television journalist
Anastasia Kvitko - glamour model and entrepreneur
Ludmilla Radchenko - female model
Alexey Goloborodko - contortionist
Mikhail Kosenko - activist
Alexey Korolyuk - Soviet-Russian sculptor and medallist, and the first president of the Leningrad medal club
Iona Nikitchenko – judge of the Supreme Court of the Soviet Union
Oleksiy Alchevsky – entrepreneur, philanthropist, and industrialist of the Russian Empire. He was a pioneer in establishing the first finance group in Russia.
Georgy Gapon, a Russian Orthodox priest and a popular working-class leader before the 1905 Russian Revolution
Vasily Filippovich Tkachenko, better known as Vasily the Barefoot (1856–1933), Russian wanderer
Viktor Bout – arms dealer
Tetiana Montian - blogger
Stefan Yavorsky – archbishop and statesman in the Russian Empire and the first president of the Most Holy Synod
Nina Kukharchuk-Khrushcheva – First Lady of USSR, the second wife of the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev
Raisa Titarenko-Gorbacheva – First Lady of USSR, wife of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev
Vera Kholodnaya – star of Russian silent cinema
Yelena Bondarchuk (half Ukrainian), Soviet actress
Mikhail Zvinchuk - milblogger and author of the Russian Telegram channel Rybar (Russian: Рыбарь, lit. 'fisherman'), which has over 1.1 million subscribers
Zhanna Prokhorenko, Soviet actress
Klara Luchko, Soviet actress
Grigory Kushelev-Bezborodko - writer, publisher and philanthropist
Valeriya Zaklunna – Soviet actress, People's Artist of Russia (22 May 2004)
Pavel Pavlenko – Soviet stage and film actor
Pyotr Pavlenko - Soviet writer
Sergei Pavlenko -  painter
Alexey Eybozhenko - Soviet film and theater actor
Nikolay Andreyevich Storozhenko - painter
Daria Pavlenko - ballet dancer
Galina Stepanenko - ballerina
Yelena Stepanenko - actress
Gleb Savchenko - dancer and choreographer
Aleksandr Demyanenko - film and theater actor
Aleksandr Yatsenko – actor
Vitali Kishchenko - Soviet actor
Sergey Stepanchenko - theater and film actor, film director
Aleksey Fedorchenko - film director
Alexander Oleshko - theater and film actor, TV presenter, singer, parodist, Honored Artist of Russia (2015)
Artur Kirilenko – entrepreneur, between 1994 and 2010 was owner and director of Stroymontazh, one of the largest property development companies in St Petersburg, Russia. Honorary Builder of Russia.
Viktor Pshonka – former Prosecutor General of Ukraine (from 4 November 2010 until 22 February 2014), State Counselor of Justice of Ukraine and member of the High Council of Justice of Ukraine
Nadezhda Bondarenko - Transnistrian politician who has served as the acting chairperson of the Transnistrian Communist Party (PKP) since late 2018, born in Ivanovo
Yuri Shvets – Major in the KGB between 1980 and 1990
Georgy Martyniuk (1940–2014), Russian actor
Leonid Martynyuk (born 1978), Russian opposition journalist
Victor Kostetskiy – Russian and Soviet actor
Anna Kovalchuk – actress
Miroslava Karpovich – actress and model
Irina Kovalenko - model, won “Miss Murmansk” and “The Beauty of Russia” titles in 2001
Irina Antonenko - actress and model, and beauty pageant titleholder who was crowned Miss Russia 2010
Natalya Lisenko - Ukrainian-Russian actress
Yaroslav Boyko – Russian actor of theatre and cinema
Pavel Derevyanko - theatre and film actor
Yuri Muzychenko – musician and video blogger, frontman and one of the founders of the folk-rock group 'The Hatters'
Aleksandr Tsekalo – musician, actor, radio and TV host. Founder of production company Sreda.
Sergey Makovetsky – film and stage actor
Ivan Koval-Samborsky – Stage and film actor
Aleksandr Goloborodko - actor
Ilona Timchenko - pianist and composer
Oleg Timchenko - contemporary painter and founder of the “10th Floor Group”
Lyubov Polishchuk - actress
Dmytro Tabachnyk - politician who served as the minister of education and science of Ukraine from 2010 to 2014
Sergei Garmash – Soviet and Russian film and stage actor, People's Artist of Russia
Sergei Magnitsky – Ukrainian-born Russian lawyer and tax advisor
Oleg Chilap – rock musician, poet and writer, the leader of Optimalniy Variant band
Dositheus (Ivanchenko) – bishop of the Russian Orthodox Church
Nikita Dzhigurda – movie actor, singer, and cult media icon
Allan Chumak – faith healer who came to prominence at the height of Gorbachev's Perestroika
Aleksei Petrenko – Soviet  film and stage actor
Igor Petrenko - actor
Kirill Petrenko - conductor, Chief Conductor of the Berlin Philharmonic
Mikhail Petrenko - opera singer
Roman Petrenko - media executive
Vadim Kazachenko - Soviet singer
Vasily Petrenko - conductor, Chief Conductor of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic and Oslo Philharmonic
Andrey Krasko - theatre and cinema actor
Olga Krasko - Russian actress
Ivan I. Krasko - film and theater actor, father of Andrey
Julia Krasko - violinist
Alexei Romanenko - cellist
Petro Prokopovych – founder of commercial beekeeping and the inventor of the first movable frame hive
Viktor Petrik – businessman, claims to have made a number of scientific breakthroughs which he markets through his company
Anatoly Savenko – Russian nationalist, social and political activist, lawyer, writer, essayist and journalist.
Kirill Vyshinsky – journalist
Alexander Borodai – journalist and entrepreneur, former separatist leader who was Prime Minister of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People's Republic in 2014
Arkady Babchenko – print and television journalist
Anatoly Lysenko – Soviet and Russian television figure, journalist, director, producer
Dmitry Gerasimenko – businessman, ex-owner of steel company Krasny Oktyabr Closed Joint-Stock Company and of basketball clubs BC Krasny Oktyabr and Pallacanestro Cantù.
Yuriy Kutsenko – actor, producer, singer, poet, and screenwriter
Diana Panchenko - journalist and TV presenter
Dmitriy Dyachenko – director, producer and screenwriter
Alexander Klimenko – former Ukrainian entrepreneur and politician, former Minister of Revenue and Duties of Ukraine
Vladimir Ivanenko – founder of the first nongovernmental cable and essential television network in the USSR (1988); initiator and organizer of the first direct satellite broadcast from the territory of the former USSR (1994)
Oleksiy Zhuravko - politician
Leonid Zhunko - politician
Viktor Yanukovych, the fourth President of Ukraine
Lyudmyla Nastenko-Yanukovych, former First Lady of Ukraine
Viktor Yanukovych Jr, a Ukrainian politician and Member of Parliament
Oleksandr Yakymenko (public servant) - chief of the security service of Ukraine 2013–2014
Illia Kyva – Ukrainian politician, effectively defected to Russia by asking Russian president Vladimir Putin for a Russian passport (Russian citizenship) and political asylum
Oleksandr Muzychko – Ukrainian political activist, a member of UNA-UNSO and coordinator of Right Sector in Western Ukraine.Was born near the Ural Mountains

Nikolai Alexandrovich Kushelev-Bezborodko  - art collector
Igor Danchenko, Russian analyst in the United States
Tikhon Dzyadko - journalist, television presenter and media manager, the editor-in-chief of the TV Rain channel, former deputy editor-in-chief and host of the RTVI TV network.
Yury Dud – sports journalist and YouTuber, was editor-in-chief of Sports.ru


=== Culture ===
Nikolai Gogol – writer
Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky (quarter Zaporizhian cossack) – composer
Nikolai Ostrovsky – socialist realist writer
Korney Chukovsky – poet
Yevgeny Yevtushenko – poet
Sasha Yevtushenko - director and producer for BBC Radio, son of Yevgeny
Sergei Bondarchuk – actor and film director
Natalya Bondarchuk –actress and film director
Fyodor Bondarchuk – film director
Alexander Dovzhenko – film director
Leonid Gaidai – film director
Anna Politkovskaya – journalist, writer, and human rights activist
Taras Shevchenko – poet
Vladimir Korolenko – writer
Mikhail Zoshchenko – writer
Vladimir Nemirovich-Danchenko – playwright and theatre administrator, one of the two founders of the Moscow Art Theatre
Vasily Nemirovich-Danchenko – writer and a journalist
Sergei Lukyanenko – science fiction and fantasy author
 Kir Bulychev(Igor Mozheiko) - Soviet science fiction writer, critic, translator and historian
Konstantin Paustovsky – writer
Gregory Skovoroda – writer and philosopher
Anna Netrebko – operatic soprano
Arkady Averchenko – playwright and satirist
Larisa Shepitko – film director, screenwriter and actress
Vasily Avseenko (Vasily Avseyenko) (1842–1913), Russian literary critic, writer, and journalist
Grigory Chukhray – Soviet film director
Pavel Chukhray – Soviet film director
Les Kurbas – Soviet film director
Konstantin Lopushansky – Soviet and Russian film director, film theorist and author
Pavel Morozenko – Soviet theatre and film actor
Yuri Moroz – Soviet and Russian film director, actor, scriptwriter, producer
Andrei Kravchuk – television and film director and screenwriter
David Burliuk – poet and painter, often described as "the father of Russian Futurism"
Wladimir Burliuk – avant-garde artist, Cubo-futurist
Theophan Prokopovich – Russian Imperial Orthodox theologian, writer, poet, mathematician, and philosopher
Amvrosy Metlinsky – poet, ethnographer, folklorist and panslavist
Dmitry Levitsky – painter
Vladimir Borovikovsky – painter
Konstantin Kryzhitsky – landscape painter
Boris Vladimirski – Soviet painter of the Socialist Realism school.
Dmitry Bezperchy – painter
Rufin Sudkovsky – painter
Vladimir Orlovsky – painter
Georges Florovsky - Orthodox priest, theologian, and historian
Nikolai Pimonenco – painter
Nikolai Yaroshenko – painter
Alexander Litovchenko – painter
Ivan Vasilenko - writer
Galina Pisarenko - Soviet-born Russian soprano
Gennady Pasko - impressionist painter
Alexander Murashko – painter
Anton Losenko – neoclassical painter and academician
Aleksandr Shevchenko – modernist painter and sculptor
Artem Ovcharenko - ballet dancer
Gennady Ovcharenko - artist
Sergey Solomko – painter, watercolorist, illustrator and designer
Ivan Soshenko – painter
Maximilian Kirienko-Voloshin - poet
Vasily Velichko – poet, playwright and publicist
Alexei Khvostenko - avant-garde poet, singer-songwriter and artist
Ivan Savenko – painter, Honored Artist of the RSFSR
Yury Kharchenko - artist
Yaroslav Levchenko - modern painter
Nikolay Samokish – painter
Maria Rudnitskaya - Soviet realist painter, graphic artist, and art teacher
Igor Savitsky – painter, archeologist and collector, especially of avant-garde art
Grigori Zozulya – artist
Ippolit Bogdanovich – Russian classicist author of light poetry,
Yevgeny Grebyonka – romantic prose writer, poet, and philanthropist
Vasily Kapnist – poet and playwright
Igor Markevitch – avant-garde composer and conductor
Yevhen Pluzhnyk – poet
Vasily Stus – poet
Daria Serenko – poet, curator and public artist
Sergey Parkhomenko – publisher, journalist and political commentator
Igor Savchenko – screenwriter and film director
Sergej Mironović Golovčenko - writer and illustrator
Ilia Lagutenko – musician
Yevgeny Nesterenko - opera singer
Yuri Leonidovich Nesterenko - writer and antisexual activist
Viktor Burduk - artist
Yuri Shevchuk – musician
Yuri Klimenko – Soviet and Russian cinematographer and photographer
Nikolai Gubenko – Soviet and Russian actor, film and theatre director, screenwriter, founder of the Community of Taganka Actors theatre.People's Artist of the RSFSR
Roman Miroshnichenko - virtuoso guitarist, composer, and band leader
Fyodor Sologub – Symbolist poet, novelist, playwright and essayist
Ivan Kozlovsky – lyric tenor, long-time teacher at the Moscow Conservatory
Bohdan Dedyckiy – writer, poet and journalist
Maxim Berezovsky – composer
Grigory Alchevsky – composer
Michał Czajkowski – writer
Tomasz Padura – Romantic poet
Grigory Danilevsky – writer, historical novelist, and Privy Councillor of Russia
Yuri Klimenko – Soviet and Russian cinematographer and photographer
Maryna and Serhiy Dyachenko – fantasy authors
Viktor Dotsenko - author
Aleksandr Ivanchenko - writer
Vasily Narezhny – writer known for his satirical depiction of provincial mores in the vein of the 18th-century picaresque novel
Ruslan Gorobets – music composer, singer and arranger
Nikolay Shcherbina – poet
Sergei Skripka - Soviet  conductor, and a People's Artist of Russia, conductor of the State Symphony Cinema Orchestra.
Klym Polishchuk – journalist, poet and writer
Yury Koval – author, artist, and screenplay writer
Aleksei Bibik – one of the first working-class novelists
Valentin Pikul – Soviet historical novelist
Oleg Kulik – performance artist, sculptor, photographer and curator
Anatoly Polyanski – architect
Alexander Kaminsky - Russian Imperial architect
Ivan Martos – Ukrainian and Russian sculptor and art teacher who helped awaken Russian interest in Neoclassical sculpture
Alexander Vertinsky – artist, poet, singer, composer, cabaret artist and actor
Serhii Vasylkivsky – artist
Vasili Gogol-Yanovsky - author of a number of theater pieces
Panteleimon Kulish – writer, critic, poet, folklorist, and translator
Yevgeny Titarenko – writer
Eduard Butenko (1941–2006), Russian actor and theatre director
Nikolai Gritsenko – theater and film actor
Nikolay Gritsenko - painter
Vladimir Sakhnenko - painter
Elena Kostenko - Soviet painter
Vasili Eroshenko - anarchist writer, esperantist, linguist, and teacher
Nikolai Panchenko - poet
Lyubov Zakharchenko - poet and singer-songwriter
Grigory Pasko – military journalist
Lev Vlassenko - Soviet pianist and teacher
Natasha Vlassenko - pianist and teacher
Maria Pakhomenko - Soviet singer
Viktor Kosenko – composer, pianist, and educator
Vadim Rudenko - pianist
Alexandra Strelchenko – actress and singer, performer of Russian folk songs, Russian romances and pop songs, People's Artist of the RSFSR
Klavdiya Shulzhenko – Soviet popular female singer and actress
Alexandra Snezhko-Blotskaya – Soviet animated film director
Lyudmila Gurchenko – popular Soviet and Russian actress, singer and entertainer. People's Artist of the USSR (1983)
Viktor Klimenko – singer
Vanya Dmitrienko -singer
Darya Antonyuk – singer
Anatoly Marchenko  - author
Yevgeny Kibkalo – baritone and a People's Artist of the RSFSR
Viktor Merezhko – screenwriter, film director, playwright, actor, writer, TV presenter, People's Artist of the Russian Federation (2014)
Albert Chernenko - philosopher, best known for his innovations in the field of social and legal philosophy
Oleg Karavaychuk – Soviet and Russian composer, author of music for many films and theater performances
Anastasia Stotskaya – singer
Arkady Ukupnik – composer, pop singer, actor, and producer
Bogdan Titomir – musician, rapper and DJ, who began his career in a popular 1990s duo Car-Man
Vasiliy Vakulenko (Basta) - rapper, producer and radio host
Sogdiana Fedorinskaya – singer and actress
Alexander Gnylytsky – artist
Tetyana Yablonska – painter
Illya Chichkan – artist
Aleksandr Melnik - film director
Anton Melnik - film producer, known for his work in action movies
Vitaly Korotich – writer and journalist
Pamfil Yurkevich – idealist philosopher and teacher
Nikolay Gnedich – poet and translator
Natalia Dudinskaya – prima ballerina who dominated the Kirov Ballet from the 1930s through the 1950s
Svetlana Loboda – singer and composer
Vera Brezhneva (Halushka) – singer
Natasha Korolyova (Porivay) – singer
Sergei Glushko - actor, singer and fitness model, the husband of Natasha Korolyova
Anastasia Prikhodko – singer, represented Russia in the Eurovision Song Contest 2009 in Moscow
Regina Todorenko – pop-singer and television presenter, member of the Russian show "Voice"
Alexander Archipenko – avant-garde artist, sculptor, and graphic artist
Ilya Bondarenko - architect
Maria Protsenko - Soviet architect
Alexander Zelenko - architect
Marian Peretyatkovich – architect
Andrey Kovalchuk – sculptor.
Natalia Ermolenko-Yuzhina – opera singer (soprano)
Nicolai Ivanovich Kravchenko – battle painter, journalist and writer
Aleksei Ilyich Kravchenko - Soviet painter, illustrator, draughtsman and printmaker
Yevsey Moiseyenko – Soviet  painter and pedagogue. People's Painter of the USSR (1970) and Hero of Socialist Labour (1986).
Pyotr Leshchenko – singer, universally considered to be "the King of Russian Tango"
Lev Leshchenko - singer
Olga Peretyatko – operatic soprano
Vladimir Bortko – film director
Zinaida Pronchenko - film historian, film critic, and journalist
Alla Horska – monumentalist painter, one of the first representatives of the underground art movement
Mykhailo Boychuk – painter, most commonly known as a monumentalist
Igor Krutoy – music composer, performer, producer and musical promoter
Mikhail Gulko – author and performer of Russian chanson
Nikolai Fomenko, Russian rock musician and motor racer
Bela Rudenko – opera singer, music teacher, and professor of the Moscow Conservatory
Ignaty Potapenko – writer and playwright.
Vladimir Khotinenko – film director
Igor Matvienko – producer, composer, founder of the bands Lyube, Ivanushki International, Korni, Fabrika, KuBa
Lolita Milyavskaya – singer, actress, TV and film director
Yolka – singer
Boris Tishchenko - composer and pianist
Sergey Dorenko – Russian TV and radio journalist, known for hosting a weekly news commentary program in 1999–2000
Zinaida Pronchenko – film historian, film critic, and journalist
Sergey Migitsko – film and theater actor
Aleksei Kravchenko (actor) - Soviet  actor
Alla Osipenko - Soviet ballerina
Irina Kupchenko – stage and film actress
Vladislava Evtushenko - actress, dancer, model and beauty pageant titleholder
Viktor Avdyushko – Soviet actor and a People's Artist of the Russian SFSR
Alexey Titarenko - photographer and artist
Vasily Avchenko - writer and journalist
Aleksandr Filippenko - actor, People's Artist of Russia (2000)
Vera Kamsha – author of high fantasy and a journalist.
Andrey Kavun – film director and screenwriter
Halyna Bezruk – actress and singer
Anna Kovalchuk – actress known for her roles in film, television, and theater
Andrey Korolchuk - Soviet  painter, graphic artist, printmaker, book artist, teacher
Eldzhey (Alexey Uzenyuk) – rapper and songwriter
Roman Viktyuk – theatre director, actor, and screenwriter
Taisia Povaliy - singer and actress
Mikhail Reshetnyak - singer, composer and songwriter
Anna Asti - singer


=== Sports ===

Vladimir Kramnik – chess grandmaster, the Classical World Chess Champion from 2000 to 2006, and the undisputed World Chess Champion from 2006 to 2007. He has won three team gold medals and three individual medals at Chess Olympiads.
Alexander Grischuk – chess grandmaster, Russian champion (2009), three-time world blitz chess champion (in 2006, 2012 and 2015).
Alexandra Kosteniuk – chess grandmaster who was Women's World Chess Champion from 2008 to 2010. She was European women's champion in 2004 and a two-time Russian Women's Chess Champion (in 2005 and 2016)
Lyudmila Rudenko – Soviet chess player and the second women's world chess champion, from 1950 until 1953; was awarded the FIDE titles of International Master (IM) and Woman International Master (WIM) in 1950, and Woman Grandmaster (WGM) in 1976. She was the first woman awarded the International Master title.
Natalia Titorenko – chess player who hold the FIDE title of Woman International Master (1982)
Ekaterina Lagno – Russian (since 2014) chess grandmaster, Women's Vice World Champion in 2018, Women's World Rapid Champion in 2014 and Women's World Blitz Champion in 2010, 2018 and 2019.
Andrey Esipenko – chess grandmaster, who won the European U10 Chess Championship in 2012, and both the European U16 and World U16 Chess Championship in 2017
Dmitry Jakovenko - chess player, who was awarded the title Grandmaster by FIDE in 2001
Kirill Alekseenko - chess grandmaster
Anton Demchenko - chess grandmaster
Georgy Borisenko - Soviet correspondence chess grandmaster and chess theoretician
Alexander Panchenko - chess Grandmaster and honored coach who headed the All-Russian chess school
Boris Savchenko - chess player
Valentina Golubenko - Russian-born chess player
Alexander Donchenko - Russian-German chess grandmaster
Alexander Moiseenko - 2013 European chess champion
Nikolay Davydenko – tennis player
Philipp Davydenko - tennis player, brother of Nikolay
Andrei Kirilenko - basketball executive and former professional basketball player
Vladislav Tretiak – ice hockey goaltender; 3 time Olympic gold medallist; 10 time world champion; considered one of the greatest of all time
Ilya Kovalchuk – ice hockey player
Pavel Datsyuk – professional ice hockey player who is currently an unrestricted free agent
Viktor Gordiyuk - former ice hockey right wing
Alexei Zhitnik – ice hockey defenceman; has played more games in the National Hockey League (NHL) (1,085) than any other Soviet-born defenceman.
Daniil Sobchenko – ice hockey player; was the member of the Russian national team that competed in the IIHF World Championship's under 18 and under 20 levels; winning gold for the country in 2011.
Vitaly Anikeyenko – ice hockey player
Angelina Goncharenko - ice hockey player
Kirill Marchenko - professional ice hockey winger currently playing with the Columbus Blue Jackets of the National Hockey League
Nikolai Kovalenko - ice hockey forward
Andrei Kovalenko - former professional ice hockey forward
Filipp Savchenko - ice hockey player
Andrei Nikitenko - ice hockey player
Vyacheslav Leshchenko - professional ice hockey right winger
Grigori Denisenko - professional ice hockey winger currently playing for the Henderson Silver Knights of the American Hockey League  as a prospect to the Vegas Golden Knights of the National Hockey League
Alexey Marchenko – professional ice hockey defenceman who currently plays for Lokomotiv Yaroslavl in the Kontinental Hockey League (KHL)
Alexei Tereshchenko – professional ice hockey forward, who is currently an unrestricted free agent, he most recently played for Avangard Omsk of the Kontinental Hockey League (KHL).
Vladimir Tarasenko – professional ice hockey right winger and alternate captain for the St. Louis Blues of the National Hockey League (NHL)
Andrey Tarasenko (ice hockey) - ice hockey player
Ignat Zemchenko – professional ice hockey player currently playing with HC Yugra in the Supreme Hockey League (VHL)
Roman Lyashenko - ice hockey player
Vasily Demchenko - ice hockey player
Kirill Kononenko- ice hockey player
Kirill Sidorenko - ice hockey player
Yuri Babenko - ice hockey player
Andrei Kuzmenko - ice hockey player
Igor Rasko - former professional ice hockey centre
Gleb Klimenko - ice hockey player
Sergey Gomolyako - ice hockey player
Bogdan Savenko - Soviet ice hockey player
Vitaliy Lytvynenko - Soviet ice hockey player
Andrey Rasolko - Soviet ice hockey player
Konstantin Spodarenko - Soviet ice hockey player
Oleg Antonenko - Soviet ice hockey player
Vladimir Lutchenko - retired Soviet ice hockey player who played in the Soviet Hockey League
Vyacheslav Timchenko (ice hockey) - Soviet ice hockey player
Andrei Savchenko - Soviet ice hockey player
Andrei Kovalenko - former professional ice hockey forward
Viktor Konovalenko - Soviet ice hockey goaltender
Pavel Boychenko - former professional ice hockey player who played in the Russian Superleague (RSL) and Kontinental Hockey League (KHL)
Mikhail Grigorenko - professional ice hockey forward for HC CSKA Moscow of the Kontinental Hockey League (KHL)
Igor Grigorenko, Russian professional ice hockey right winger
Vyacheslav Litovchenko - professional ice hockey forward who is currently playing with HC Yugra of the Supreme Hockey League (VHL)
Valentyn Oletsky - Soviet professional ice hockey player
Denis Shvidki – former professional ice hockey right wing
Dmitri Khristich – ice hockey player
Anton But – former professional ice hockey winger
Oleg Tverdovsky – ice hockey defenceman
Vitaly Vishnevskiy – former professional ice hockey defenceman. He previously played in the National Hockey League for the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, Atlanta Thrashers, Nashville Predators, and New Jersey Devils, as well as for Lokomotiv Yaroslavl, SKA St. Petersburg and Severstal Cherepovets in the KHL.
Alexander Komaristy – ice hockey centre who plays for HC Dinamo Saint Petersburg in the Supreme Hockey League (VHL)
Andrei Nikolishin – ice hockey player; Olympic Bronze medal winner
Anton Babchuk – ice hockey defenceman
[[Alexander Akimovich Martynyuk (Russian: Александр Акимович Мартынюк; 11 September 1945 – 16 November 2022)[citation needed] was a Russian ice hockey player who played in the Soviet Hockey League
Alexander Martynyuk - ice hockey player who played in the Soviet Hockey League
Alexander Godynyuk - Soviet professional ice hockey defenceman
Denis Metlyuk - professional ice hockey player who played in the Russian Superleague (RSL)
Igor Kravchuk (born 1966), Russian ice hockey player
Alexander Korolyuk - former professional ice hockey winger who played in the National Hockey League (NHL) with the San Jose Sharks before playing the remainder of his career in the Kontinental Hockey League (KHL)
Arseni Gritsyuk - professional ice hockey player for SKA Saint Petersburg of the Kontinental Hockey League
Alex Galchenyuk - ice hockey center currently under contract with Amur Khabarovsk of the Kontinental Hockey League
Alexander Galchenyuk - former professional ice hockey, began playing top-level professional hockey with HC Dynamo Moscow
Kostiantyn Kasianchuk – ice hockey player
Sergei Petrenko (footballer) (born 1955), Soviet/Russian football player and coach
Sergei Petrenko - Soviet ice hockey player
Oleg Kovalenko (ice hockey) - Soviet ice hockey player
Yuri Gunko -  Soviet ice hockey player
Vladimir Tarasenko - ice hockey player
Viktor Petrenko - Soviet World and Olympic champion in figure skating
Vladimir Petrenko - Soviet figure skater
Alexei Sviatchenko - pair skater
Stanislav Timchenko - figure skater
Anatoliy Tymoshchuk – football coach and a former midfielder, currently an assistant coach of the Russian Premier League club Zenit Saint Petersburg
Vladimir Kuts – Soviet long-distance runner, who won the 5000 and 10000 m races at the 1956 Olympics, setting Olympic records in both events
Ivan Poddubny – professional wrestler from the Russian Empire and later the Soviet Union
Olga Dvirna – female middle-distance runner who represented the Soviet Union in the late 1970s and early 1980s
Anton Shvets – footballer who plays for Akhmat Grozny, as a central midfielder, represents the Russia national football team internationally
Anatoliy Lebid -  Soviet footballer
Ilona Melnichenko - ice dancer for the Soviet Union
Sergei Ponomarenko - ice dancer
Sergei Yuryevich Ponomarenko - footballer
Tatyana Stetsenko - Soviet rower
Svetlana Ponomarenko - long-distance runner
Oleg Salenko – soccer player
Sergei Lemeshko - footballer
Hryhoriy Nosko - Soviet footballer
Aleksandr Stolyarenko - footballer
Aleksandr Kleshchenko - football player
Evgeny Kleshchenko - BMX rider
Nadezhda Kharchenko - footballer
Veniamin Soldatenko - Soviet athlete who competed mainly in the 50 km walk
Rostislav Soldatenko -  football player who plays for FC Alania Vladikavkaz
Vladimir Kononenko - footballer
Svetlana Petko- football goalkeeper
Aleksandr Naumenko (footballer) (born 1997), Russian football player
Valentina Kharchenko - track and field athlete
Yuri Kharchenko - Soviet luger
Semen Pavlichenko- luger
Ksenia Klimenko -  gymnast
Polina Shmatko  -  gymnast
Aleksandr Vasilenko - footballer
Dmitri Vasilenko - gymnast
Oleg Vasilenko - football manager
Ruslan Gordiyenko - footballer
Igor Kuzmenko - footballer
Mikhail Mishchenko - footballer
Valeri Voytenko - football coach and player
Yevgeni Lutsenko - football striker
Ivan Kuzmenko - swimmer
Valentin Vinnichenko - footballer
Aleksei Kutsenko - football player
Volodymyr Levchenko - Soviet footballer
Yuriy Kutsenko - Soviet decathlete
Mykhaylo Storozhenko - Soviet decathlete
Artem Lukyanenko - decathlete
Yevgeniy Lukyanenko - pole vaulter
Yevgeni Golovchenko - football player
Dmitri Sidorenko - footballer
Elizaveta Sidorenko  - Paralympic swimmer
Tatyana Sidorenko - Soviet volleyball player
Vasiliy Sidorenko - Soviet-Russian hammer thrower
Ivan Revenko - para-athlete
Andrey Tarasenko (powerlifter) - powerlifter
Viktor Nikitenko - football coach
David Yurchenko- footballer
Ihor Yurchenko - Soviet footballer
Natalia Yurchenko - Soviet artistic gymnast
Vasyl Yurchenko - Soviet sprint canoer
Sergei Miroshnichenko (footballer) - footballer
Veronika Miroshnichenko - tennis player
Valery Kornienko - Soviet pair skater
Oleg Kornienko- Russian and Kazakhstani footballer
Igor Lebedenko - footballer
Igor Shinkarenko - football player and manager
Vladlen Naumenko - Soviet footballer
Yelena Lebedenko - heptathlete
Artem Dzyuba – Ukrainian-born Russian soccer player, whose father is Ukrainian.
Aleksei Miranchuk and Anton Miranchuk – twin Russian soccer players of Ukrainian origin from Kuban.
Yaroslav Rakitskyi – footballer currently playing as a defender for Russian club FC Zenit Saint Petersburg
Vladislav Ternavsky – football coach and former player
Anatoliy Byshovets – Soviet and Russian football manager and former Soviet international striker
Sergei Semak – football manager and a former international midfielder who is currently the manager of Zenit St. Petersburg
Alexey Oleynik – mixed martial artist and combat sambo fighter currently signed with the Ultimate Fighting Championship, competing in their heavyweight division.
Anna Pogorilaya – figure skater
Irina Poltoratskaya – Russian team handball player, playing on the Russian women's national handball team.
Tatyana Navka – former competitive ice dancer
Olga Sherbak – handball player who plays for HC Lada
Oksana Grishuk – former competitive ice dancer.
Elena Riabchuk – former pair skater
Yury Yermolenko - sport shooter
Rinat Yesipenko - footballer
Aleksei Kalashnik – professional football player
Konstantin Pilipchuk - male acrobatic gymnast medalled at five Acrobatic Gymnastics World Championships
Valentin Moldavsky – Russian (since 2014) combat sambo and mixed martial arts practitioner, World and European Champion in +100 kg.
Dmitry Pashytsky – volleyball player, member of the Russian club Zenit Saint Petersburg, Estonian Champion (2011), Russian Champion (2019).
Irina Zhuk – ice dancing coach and a former competitor for the Soviet Union
Maria Stavitskaia – former competitive figure skater
Leonid Zhabotynsky – weightlifter who set 19 world records in the superheavyweight class, and won gold medals at the 1964 and 1968 Olympic Games
Alexei Dudchenko - acrobatic gymnast
Valentin Vdovichenko - Soviet fencer
Valeri Kravchenko - Soviet volleyball player
Sergei Makarenko – retired Soviet sprint canoeist who competed from late 1950s to early 1960s
Valeri Didenko (born 1946), Soviet canoeist
Nikita Gubenko - slalom canoeist
Konstantin Kostenko - Soviet sprint canoeist
Olga Kostenko - sprint canoeist
Alexander Dyachenko - sprint canoer
Ruslan Mashchenko - hurdler and sprinter
Anatoly Kononenko - Soviet sprint canoer
Zdislav Soroko - Soviet sprint canoer
Grigory Kiriyenko - fencer
Valeri Kiriyenko - biathlete
Ekaterina Stepanenko - football player
Nikolay Stepanenko - Soviet sprint canoeist
Oleg Stepanenko - Soviet hurdler
Sergei Stepanenko  - Russian footballer
Wladimir Resnitschenko- fencer
Vyacheslav Ivanenko - Soviet race walker
Dmitri Gunko - football coach and former player
Sergei Gunko - football coach and former player
Aleksandr Omelchenko - footballer
Igor Omelchenko - Soviet swimmer
Dmitri Kirichenko - footballer and coach
Dmitry Sergeyevich Kosenko - footballer
Sergei Kulichenko - footballer
Andrey Karpenko - Soviet footballer and football functionary
Leonid Derevyanko - Soviet sprint canoer who competed in the early to mid-1970s
Anatoli Yevtushenko – Honored coach of the USSR (handball)
Alexander Evtushenko - racing cyclist
Aleksandr Butko - volleyball player, a member of Russia men's national volleyball team and Russian club Ural Ufa, 2012 Olympic Games
Vitali Kovalenko - volleyball player
Irina Zaryazhko - volleyball player, who plays as a middle blocker
Aleksandr Kovalenko – retired USSR triple jumper who won the bronze medal at the 1988 Summer Olympics
Vladimir Yashchenko – member of the Soviet national team and former world record holder in the high jump (233 cm, 234 cm and 235 cm).
Tetyana Hlushchenko – former Soviethandball player who competed in the 1976 Summer Olympics
Tetyana Kozyrenko – footballer, who plays for Lokomotiv Moscow in the Women's Football League
Andrei Akimenko  Russian football player
Rod Dyachenko - soccer player
Vitalii Gritsenko (born 1985), Russian Paralympic athlete
Mikhail Akimenko, high jumper
Pavel Fomenko,  high jumper
Vadim Tarasenko - speedway rider
Stanislav Tarasenko - long jumper
Evgeny Yarovenko - Soviet footballer and coach
Vladyslav Akimenko - Soviet competition sailor
Veronika Andrusenko - swimmer
Viktor Krasko - Soviet swimmer
Svetlana Kolesnichenko - synchronized swimmer
Kirill Kolesnichenko - footballer
Mikhail Ponomarenko - footballer
Yevgeny Ovsiyenko - association football player
Yevgeny Onopriyenko - footballer
Ilya Khomenko - competitive swimmer who specializes in breaststroke
Viacheslav Andrusenko - swimmer
Sergey Fesenko, Sr. - swimmer
Yuliya Fomenko, Russian backstroke swimmer
Yekaterina Fesenko - Soviet hurdler
Heorhiy Dybenko (born 1928), Soviet athlete
Natalie Avseenko (Natalya Avseyenko), former free diving champion featured in a photographic series illustrating the Orda Cave, a gypsum crystal cave underneath the western Ural Mountains
Nataliya Zinchenko – football player who currently acts as manager for Zvezda Perm
Anatoli Zinchenko - Soviet footballer and coach
Artyom Danilenko - footballer
Aleksei Savchenko - footballer
Anastasia Savchenko - pole vaulter
Mikhail Savchenko - footballer
Oxana Savchenko - Paralympic swimmer
Liliya Vasilchenko - Soviet cross-country skier
Olga Vasilchenko - rower
Aleksei Kostenko - footballer
Vladimir Romanenko - footballer
Andrei Zakharenko - association football player
Aleksandr Sayenko - football player
Dmitriy Danilenko - fencer
Ekaterina Gnidenko - track cyclist
Irina Kirichenko - Soviet sprint cyclist
Viktoriia Danilenko - gymnast
Vladimir Danilenko - Paralympic swimmer
Ekaterina Dmitrenko - footballer
Oleg Gerasimenko - footballer
Oleg Dmitrenko - footballer
Gennady Ivanchenko - Soviet weightlifter
Ivan Ivanchenko - footballer
Anastasia Dotsenko - cross-country skier
Sergei Dotsenko - Soviet football player and coach
Sergei Prikhodko (footballer, born 1962), football player and coach
Sergei Prikhodko (footballer, born 1984), football player
Aleksei Babenko - footballer
Viktor Bondarenko (footballer) - football coach and former player
Alexei Eremenko (born 1983), Russian-Finnish association football player
Aleksei Borisovich Yeryomenko (born 1964), Russian-Finnish association football player, father of Alexei Eremenko
Igor Eremenko (born 1997), Russian ice dancer who defected to the United States
Ilya Yeryomenko (born 1998), Russian footballer
Artem Klimenko – professional basketball player
Andrei Klimenko - footballer
Anton Klimenko - footballer
Viktor Vashchenko – former professional footballer
Dmitry Mikhaylenko -  football player who plays for FC Khimik Dzerzhinsk
Dmitry Mikhaylenko - former football player, who played for the main squad of FC Volga Nizhny Novgorod in a Russian Cup against FC SKA-Energiya Khabarovsk on 30 October 2013
Iryna Chunykhovska – former sailor, who competed for the Soviet Union
Larysa Moskalenko – former sailor, who competed for the Soviet Union
Alexander Moskalenko - trampolinist
Nikolay Moskalenko - football goalkeeper
Vitaliy Moskalenko - triple jumper
Oleg Protsenko - triple jumper
Anton Kalinitschenko - ski jumper
Regina Kalinichenko (born 1985), Russian handball player
Irina Ilchenko - volleyball player
Petr Samoylenko - basketball player
Aleksandr Krivoruchko - football player
Angelina Lazarenko - volleyball player, a member of the Russia women's national volleyball team
Viktor Lazarenko- Soviet footballer
Viktoriia Lazarenko - skier
Olga Lazarenko (born 1980), Russian skier
Vitaly Lazarenko - Russian/Soviet acrobat
Stanislav Zakharchenko - footballer
Yevgeni Zakharchenko - footballer
Larisa Ilchenko - long-distance swimmer
Leonid Zayko - volleyball player
Ksenia Ilchenko - volleyball player, playing as an outside-spiker
Svetlana Parkhomenko - tennis player
Kostyantyn Parkhomenko – football player who last played for FC Sakhalin Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk
Igor Gamula – professional football coach and a former player. He works as a scout for FC Rostov. He made his debut in the Soviet Top League in 1978 for FC Zaria Voroshilovgrad.
Anatoli Polivoda – basketball player who played for the Soviet Union
Igor Pedan – strongman who is best known for competing in the IFSA Strongman World Championships and World's Strongest Man
Victor Khryapa – former professional basketball player who last played for CSKA Moscow of the VTB United League
Ilya Tsymbalar – football player and coach
Sergei Yuran – professional football manager and a former player. He is the manager of SKA-Khabarovsk.
Vasil Yakusha – Soviet rower who competed for the Soviet Union in the 1980 Summer Olympics and in the 1988 Summer Olympics.
Oleksandr Marchenko – Soviet rower. He and his partner, who won the bronze medal for the Soviet Union in the double sculls competition at the 1988 Summer Olympics
Vladimir Marchenko (gymnast) - Olympic athlete
Ivan Edeshko – professional basketball player and coach.
Aleksandr Sobko – former football player
Valeri Popenchenko – Soviet boxer who competed in the middleweight division (−75 kg)
Boris Butenko – Soviet athlete, who competed in the men's discus throw at the 1952 Summer Olympics
Aleksandr Butenko - footballer
Mykhaylo Ishchenko - Soviet handball goalkeeper
Natalia Ishchenko - competitor in synchronized swimming
Yan Ishchenko - football player
Sergei Butenko - football coach and former player
Valeri Butenko (1941–2020), Soviet footballer
Mykola Fedorenko, retired Soviet football player and a current Ukrainian football coach
Andriy Tishchenko – Soviet former rower who competed for the Soviet Union in the 1980 Summer Olympics
Igor Kornienko – former professional tennis player
Artemi Tchernenko - tennis player
Bogdan Aleshchenko – former football midfielder
Aleksandr Andryushchenko – professional football coach and a former player who currently works as a sports department manager for FC Rostov
Vladimir Andryushchenko - Paralympic athlete
Igor Yushchenko - football coach
Gennadi Avramenko – Soviet sport shooter
Dmitri Avramenko - footballer
Aleksandr Tsarenko - football manager and former player
Denis Tkachuk - footballer
Roman Tkachuk - footballer
Valeri Tkachuk - footballer
Irina Tkatchuk - figure skater
Lyudmila Dymchenko - freestyle skier
Volodymyr Herashchenko – Soviet professional football coach and a former player.
Aleksandr Pavlenko – football official and a former player
Aleksey Pavlenko (skier) - skier
Dmitry Pavlenko - handball player
Vitali Trofimenko - footballer
Vladimir Trofimenko - pole vaulter
Vadim Pavlenko - footballer
Sergey Kovalenko – Soviet basketball player who won the gold medal with the Soviet basketball team in the 1972 Olympics, played for CSKA Moscow (1976–1980)
Sergei Kovalenko (sport shooter) - sport shooter
Sergey Kovalenko (wrestler) - wrestler
Boris Kramarenko -  Soviet wrestler
Ekaterina Kramarenko - artistic gymnast
Mykola Vynnychenko - Soviet race walker
Sergey Kramarenko (footballer, born 1946) - Soviet footballer
Sergei Kramarenko (footballer, born 1994) - Russian footballer
Lala Kramarenko - rhythmic gymnast
Galina Savenko - Soviet sprint canoer
Dmitriy Kramarenko - goalkeepers coach at CSKA Moscow
Oleh Kramarenko (footballer born 1956) - Soviet footballer and coach
Oleg Stepko – Russian (since March 2018) gymnast
Olha Huzenko – rower who competed for the Soviet Union in the 1976 Summer Olympics
Viktor Maryenko – Soviet football player and coach
Yevgeniy Zagorulko – high jump coach
Mikhail Radchenko - footballer who plays as a defender
Dmitri Radchenko - association football player
Aleksandr Nikolayevich Radchenko - association football player
Nikolai Radchenko - football player
Anna Efimenko - Paralympic swimmer
Antonina Rudenko – retired Soviet swimmer who won a gold medal in the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay at the 1966 European Aquatics Championships, setting a new European record
Aleksandr Rudenko (footballer, born 1993) - goalkeeper
Aleksandr Rudenko (footballer, born 1999) - forward
Stanislav Rudenko - football coach
Vladislav Rudenko - footballer
Maksim Rybalko - football player
Vadim Yaroshchuk – former butterfly and medley swimmer from the Soviet Union, who won two bronze medals at the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea
Olga  Detenyuk - swimmer, who specialized in breaststroke events
Irina Gumenyuk - triple jumper
Ilya Ivanyuk  - high jumper
Oleksiy Demyanyuk – high jumper, who set the world's best year performance in 1981 with a leap of 2.33 metres at a meet in Leningrad
Igor Kulish - Soviet football goalkeeper
Dmitry Muserskiy – volleyball player, member of the Russia men's national volleyball team, 2012 Olympic Champion, 2013 European Champion, gold medallist of the 2011 World Cup and multiple World League medallist.
Semyon Poltavskiy – volleyball player, who was a member of the men's national team that won the silver medal in both the 2005 and 2007 European Championships, was named Most Valuable Player in the latter tournament
Liliya Osadchaya – former Soviet volleyball player, who won a silver medal at the 1976 Summer Olympics
Andrei Karyaka – Russian football coach and a former player who played as a midfielder
Sergei Mamchur – football defender.
Viktor Miroshnichenko – boxer, represented the USSR at the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow, Soviet Union
Rostislav Plechko - professional boxer who currently holds the Russian and WBA Asia heavyweight titles
Natalya Donchenko - speed skater
Konstantin Yeryomenko – Russian futsal player who was named the greatest futsal player of the 20th century
Dmitri Shkidchenko – figure skating coach and former pair skater who competed internationally for the Soviet Union
Pavel Chumachenko - shot putter
Sergei Chumachenko - footballer
Yevgeni Chumachenko - footballer
Kseniia Levchenko - basketball player
Andrei Kovalenko (Russian footballer) - football coach and player
Denis Zubko - footballer
Olena Zubko – rower who competed for the Soviet Union in the 1976 Summer Olympics. In 1976 she was a crew member of the Soviet boat which won the silver medal in the eights event
Viktor Budyansky – retired association footballer who played as a midfielder
Oleh Leschynskyi – former Soviet professional football midfielder and Ukrainian (until 2014) and Russian (since 2014) coach
Serhei Nahorny – Soviet sprint canoeist
Valentyna Kozyr- Soviet athlete
Tatiana Volosozhar – pair skater
Evgeni Semenenko - figure skater
Semyon Semenenko - footballer
Vadim Kirichenko - Soviet footballer and manager
Sergei Kishchenko - footballer
Aleksey Ostapenko - volleyball player
Anatoli Kondratenko - Soviet football striker
Vasiliy Kondratenko - bobsledder
Alevtina Kovalenko - bobsledder
Ilia Tkachenko - ice dancer
Yury Kirichenko - taekwondo athlete
Lesya Makhno – volleyball player, member of the Russian national team that won the gold medal at the 2010 World Championship.
Yevgeniy Ivchenko – Soviet athlete who competed mainly in the 50 km walk
Yuri Vlasenko – ice dancer.
Vasyl Arkhypenko – Soviet athlete who competed mainly in the 400 metre hurdles
Leonid Tkachenko – former Soviet player and the Ukrainian-Russian coach
Maksim Tishchenko – Russian professional football coach and a former player
Aleksei Tishchenko - boxer
Alisa Tishchenko - rhythmic gymnast
Anatoly Tishchenko - sprint canoer, brother of Olga
Anatoly Tishchenko Sr. - sprint canoer, father of Anatoli and Olga
Evgeny Tishchenko - boxer
Maksim Tishchenko - football coach and a former player
Nikolai Tishchenko - Soviet football player
Olga Tishchenko - sprint canoer, sister of Anatoly
Stanislav Tishchenko - football player
Tatyana Tishchenko - sprint canoer
Viktor Tishchenko - football coach and a former player
Georgy Prokopenko – retired Soviet swimmer who competed at the 1960 and 1964 Summer Olympics
Alena Prokopenko - judoka
Anastasia Prokopenko - badminton player
Dmitri Prokopenko - footballer
Gennady Prokopenko - Soviet-Russian ski jumper
Pavel Prokopenko - pole vaulter
Viktor Prokopenko - Soviet footballer and coach
Tatyana Litovchenko - freestyle swimmer. competed in two events at the 1996 Summer Olympics
Viktor Vashchenko – former professional footballer
Vladislav Ignatenko – football player who plays for FC Nosta Novotroitsk
Dmitry Ignatenko (footballer, born 1969), Soviet and Russian footballer
Aleksandr Ignatenko - footballer and coach
Valentina Ivakhnenko – professional tennis player
Serhiy Petrenko – retired sprint canoeist
Alexander Kovalenko (canoeist) - sprint canoeist
Aleksandr Kovalenko (footballer) - footballer
Aleksandr Petrenko - triple jumper
Alexander Petrenko - basketball player
Dmitri Petrenko - Soviet/Russian football player and coach
Ihor Petrenko - Soviet pole vaulter
Liudmyla Avdieienko – athlete. She competed in the women's high jump at the 1988 Summer Olympics, representing the Soviet Union
Sergey Shavlo – former Soviet footballer
Aleksandr Shpakovsky – Soviet football player
Vitali Glushchenko  - footballer
Viktor Onopko – football coach
Ivan Nedelko - tennis player
Anastasia Nazarenko - gymnast
Anton Nazarenko - badminton player
Leonid Nazarenko - Soviet-Russian football player and coach
Natalya Boyko (1946–1996), Soviet canoeist
Sergei Boyko (born 1971), footballer
Svetlana Boyko, fencer
Andriy Demchenko – football coach and a former midfielder
Albert Demchenko - luger
Victoria Demchenko - luger
Nadiya Tkachenko - Soviet pentathlete
Oleksandr Tkachenko (footballer, born 1947), Soviet international footballer
Oleksandr Tkachenko (rower) - Soviet Olympic rower
Aleksandr Tkachenko (boxer) - Soviet Olympic boxer
Darya Tkachenko – Russian (since 2016), draughts player holding the FMJD titles of FMJD Master (MF) and Women's International Grandmaster (GMIF). She is four-time women's world champion (2005, 2006, 2008, 2011) and twice women's European champion (2004, 2006) in international draughts.
Irina Bondarchuk - former long-distance runner
Anzhelika Shevchenko – Russian (since 2017) runner who specializes in the middle-distance running events
Leonid Shevchenko - Soviet and Russian footballer and football coach
Olga Shevchenko - ski-orienteering competitor
Sofia Shevchenko - ice dancer
Vitaliy Shevchenko- footballer
Yegor Shevchenko - footballer
Anastasia Yakovenko - racing cyclist
Mariya Yakovenko - javelin thrower
Nikolay Yakovenko - wrestler
Yelena Shevchenko (gymnast) - Soviet artistic gymnast
Konstantin Bakun – Ukrainian volleyball player of [Russian] citizenship (since 2011), member of the Russia men's national volleyball team, Russian Champion (2020).
Oleksandr Haydash – Russian (since 2014) professional football striker.
Denys Holaydo – retired football midfielder
Yaroslav Vynokur - billiards player
Igor Dobrovolski – football manager and a former player
Ilya Stefanovich – football player, plays as forward for FC Volgar Astrakhan
Aleksey Sokirskiy – Russian (since 2015) hammer thrower
Oleksandr Spivak  - football player of the FC Zenit Saint Petersburg football club
Anastasia Shpilevaya – former competitive ice dancer
Artyom Bezrodny – Russian association footballer
Sergey Karetnik – football midfielder
Andrey Fedoriv – former sprinter from the former Soviet Union, who specialised in the 200 metres
Ivan Ordets – professional footballer who plays as a defender for Russian club Dynamo Moscow
Olha Maslivets – windsurfer who has competed at four Olympic Games (2000, 2004, 2008 and 2012)
Oleksandr Pomazun – former goalkeeper and a Russian football coach, goalkeepers coach with FC Khimik-Arsenal
Artyom Kovalenko - football player
Oleg Goncharenko – Distinguished Master of Sports of the USSR, was the first male Soviet speed skater to become World Allround Champion.
Yuri Doroshenko – professional football player
Vitali Doroshenko - footballer
Andrei Kovalenko - footballer, played for
Kuban Krasnodar,Rotor Volgograd, Kolos Krasnodar,
Rostselmash Rostov-on-Don, Arsenal Tula,Fakel Voronezh,Kristall Smolensk,
Kuban Krasnodar, Rubin Kazan,Terek Grozny,Luch-Energiya Vladivostok,Dynamo Stavropol

 Andrei Kovalenko - professional football coach and a former player, goalkeepers coach for FC Dynamo Kirov
Pavel Sviridenko - footballer
Svitlana Kashchenko  - Russian-Nicaraguan sport-shooter
Mykola Musiyenko – former triple jumper who represented the Soviet Union
Vyacheslav Protsenko – professional football coach and a former player
Eduard Malchenko - high jumper
Sergey Malchenko - high jumper
Dmitry Malyshko - biathlete
Alexander Sizonenko - Soviet professional basketball player
Anastasia Shlyakhovaya – female volleyball player
Yuriy Prokhorenko – former pole vaulter who competed in the 1976 Summer Olympics and in the 1980 Summer Olympics
Maksim Oberemko – Russian (since 2015) windsurfer
Tatyana Lysenko - hammer thrower
Daria Timoshenko- figure skater
Sergei Lysenko (footballer, born 1972),  footballer
Sergei Lysenko (footballer, born 1976),  footballer
Stanislav Lysenko (born 1972),  footballer
Viktor Lysenko - Soviet footballer
Iryna Ustymenko- former butterfly and freestyle swimmer, competed in three events at the 1972 Summer Olympics for the Soviet Union
Artyom Pasko - football player
Daria Makarenko - footballer
Evgeny Makarenko - boxer
Sergei Makarenko - Soviet sprint canoeist
Igor Pakhomenko - gymnast
Yury Starunsky – Soviet volleyball player who competed for the Soviet Union in the 1972 Summer Olympics and in the 1976 Summer Olympics
Vladislav Zhovnirski – pair skating coach and former competitor
Anatoli Shelest - football coach and a former player
Taras Shelest - football player, son of Anatoli
Nikolai Latysh – professional football coach, an assistant manager with FC Tobol
Pavel Moroz – volleyball player, a member of Russia men's national volleyball team and Russian club Fakel Novy Urengoy
Vera Rebrik – Russian (since 2015) track and field athlete who competes in the javelin throw
Aleksandr Bondar – Russian (since 2014) diver
Tatiana Voitiuk – Soviet former ice dancer
Mark Kondratiuk - figure skater
Vitaliy Slobodenyuk - Soviet sprint canoer
Serhiy Krasyuk – Soviet former swimmer, who won a gold and silver medal at the 1980 Summer Olympics in the 4 × 100 m medley and 4 × 200 m freestyle relays, respectively
Anastasia Bliznyuk – group rhythmic gymnast
Vera Moskalyuk – judoka
Natalya Linichuk – ice dancing coach and former competitive ice dancer for the Soviet Union
Vadim Yanchuk - football player
Nadezhda Milinchuk - Soviet sprint canoer
Sergei Osadchuk - professional football manager
Aleksandr Iaremchuk - Paralympian
Ivan Yaremchuk - Soviet footballer
Andrey Shevchuk - javelin thrower
Stephan Shevchuk - sprint canoer
Vladimir Shevchuk - footballer and manager
Lyudmyla Panchuk – Soviet  team handball player who competed in the 1976 Summer Olympics
Borys Tereshchuk – Soviet former volleyball player who competed for the Soviet Union in the 1968 Summer Olympics
Anatoliy Polishchuk – former volleyball player who competed for the Soviet Union in the 1976 Summer Olympics
Dmitry Polishchuk - windsurfer
Sofia Polishchuk - competitive ice dancer
Roman Romanchuk – Russian (since 2000) amateur boxer
Anatoliy Bondarchuk – retired Soviet hammer thrower, who is regarded as the most accomplished hammer throw coach of all time
Viktor Mikhalchuk – former volleyball player who competed for the Soviet Union in the 1968 Summer Olympics
Valery Kravchuk – retired Soviet heavyweight weightlifter
Serhiy Kravchuk – Soviet fencer
Konstantin Kravchuk (born 1985),  tennis player
Vasili Pinchuk – former football player
Sergey Marchuk - speed skater
Mikhail Polischuk - freestyle swimmer
Mykola Pinchuk – retired Soviet football player
Artur Minchuk – Russian pair skating coach and former competitor.
Borys Savchuk – Soviet sprinter, who competed in the men's 200 metres at the 1964 Summer Olympics representing the Soviet Union
Ilya Kukharchuk - football (soccer) player
Ruslan Lyashchuk – former football player
Maksim Boychuk (born 1997), Russian footballer
Igor Leshchuk - football player who plays as goalkeeper for FC Dynamo Moscow
Vladimir Kostyuk – professional footballer
Yuriy Panchenko - Ukrainian-born Russian coach and former volleyball player who competed for the Soviet Union in the 1980 Summer Olympics and in the 1988 Summer Olympics
Anastasia Panchenko- sprint canoer
Viktor Panchenko - footballer
Kirill Panchenko - footballer, son of Viktor


=== Science ===

Nicholas Miklouho-Maclay – explorer, ethnologist, anthropologist and biologist
Gleb Lozino-Lozinskiy – lead developer of the Soviet Spiral and Shuttle Buran programme.
Vladimir Vernadsky – mineralogist and geochemist
George Vernadsky – historian
Nikolay Ilyich Storozhenko, literary historian
Nikolay Vladimirovich Storozhenko, historian
Valentin Glushko – rocket scientist, a pioneer in rocket propulsion systems, and a major contributor to Soviet space and defense technology
Trofim Lysenko – agronomist and biologist
Theodosius Dobzhansky – [geneticist] and evolutionary biologist
Mikhail Ostrogradsky – mathematician
Anatoly Fomenko – mathematician, well known as a topologist, the author of a pseudoscientific theory known as New Chronology
Anton Makarenko – one of the founders of Soviet pedagogy
Vladimir Chelomey – mechanics scientist, aviation and missile engineer who invented the first Soviet pulse jet engine
Vasyl Sukhomlynsky – humanistic educator in the Soviet Union who saw the aim of education in producing a truly humane being
Boris Paton – Soviet mechanical scientist and engineer, famous for his works in electric welding
Stephen Timoshenko – engineer and academician, considered to be the father of modern engineering mechanics
Leonid Kulik – mineralogist who is noted for his research into meteorites
Viktor Bunyakovsky – mathematician
Yuri Lysianskyi – explorer
George Kistiakowsky – physical chemistry professor
Alexander Kistiakowsky – ornithologist and a specialist on bird lice
Bogdan Kistyakovski – philosopher and social scientist
Georgy Voronoy - Imperial Russian mathematician noted for defining the Voronoi diagram
Yuri Denisyuk – Soviet physicist, one of the founders of optical holography. He is known for his great contribution to holography, in particular for the so-called "Denisyuk hologram"
Valentin Bliznyuk – aircraft designer, Chief Designer of the Tu-160
Mikhail Kravchuk – mathematician
Gury Marchuk - Soviet scientist in the fields of computational mathematics, and physics of atmosphere
Rostislav Grigorchuk -  mathematician working in different areas of mathematics including group theory, dynamical systems, geometry and computer science
Vsevolod Tkachuk - Soviet chemist and academic
Valery Kostuk – Russian scientist who has contributed to the development of processes for producing gases and cryogenic liquids
Alexei Fedchenko - explorer and naturalist
Vitaly Nikolayenko - natural scientist
Boris Fedtschenko - phytopathologist, son of Alexei
Caesar Korolenko - psychiatrist
Pyotr Kashchenko – psychiatrist, social and agrarian activist, author of articles on mental health and mental health services
Alexander Dovzhenko - Soviet psychiatrist
Yuri Savenko - psychiatrist
Oleg Gazenko – scientist, general officer in the Soviet Air Force and the former director of the Institute of Biomedical Problems in Moscow
Alexander Zasyadko – Russian Imperial gunner and specialist in rocketry
Praskov′ja Georgievna Parchomenko – Soviet astronomer who discovered many minor planets between the years of 1930–1940
Valery Glivenko – mathematician
Yulij Ilyashenko - mathematician
Alexandr Mishchenko - mathematician
Felix Tarasenko - mathematician
Nikolai Yanenko - Soviet mathematician
Igor Simonenko – mathematician
Sergei Starchenko - mathematical logician
Ivan Fesenko - mathematician
Anatol Slissenko - Soviet mathematician and computer scientist
Yuri Nesterenko – mathematician
Sergei Rudenko – prominent Soviet anthropologist and archaeologist who discovered and excavated the most celebrated of Scythian burials, Pazyryk in Siberia
Dmitri Bondarenko - anthropologist and historian
Konstantin Dushenko - historian
Aleksandr Nazarenko - historian
Vladimir Lysenko – Russian academic
Vyacheslav Tishchenko - chemist
Anatoly Babko – chemist
Nikolai Fedorenko - Soviet philologist, orientalist, statesman, public figure, professor (1953), and corresponding member of the Soviet Academy of Sciences (1958)
Nikolay Fedorenko - economist and chemist
Victor Ovcharenko -  philosopher, sociologist, historian and psychologist
Anna Stetsenko, Soviet psychologist
Alexander Barchenko – biologist and researcher of anomalous phenomena from St. Petersburg
Boris Kholodenko - biologist
Mariya Sergeyenko – Soviet scholar of Roman history and philologist
Alexander Nikitenko – historian, censor, Professor of Saint Petersburg
University, and ordinary member of St. Petersburg Academy of Sciences

Andrey Yevgenyevich Lichko – psychiatrist
Fyodor Pirotsky – inventor of the world's first railway electrification system and electric tram
Vladimir Podvysotsky – pathologist, endocrinologist, immunologist and microbiologist
Arkhip Lyulka – Soviet scientist and designer of jet engines, head of the OKB Lyulka, member of the USSR Academy of Sciences
Nikolai Kibalchich – rocket pioneer
Nikolai Zarudny – explorer and zoologist who studied the flora and fauna of Central Asia
Pyotr Zinchenko – developmental psychologist
Dmitri Ivanenko – theoretical physicist
Nikolay Burdenko – Soviet surgeon, the founder of Russian neurosurgery
Vladimir Nemoskalenko – physicist
Vladimir Martynenko – sociologist, economist, and political scientist; Doctor of political sciences, Professor, Chief Scientific Officer, Institute of Socio-Political Studies under the Russian Academy of Sciences (ISPI RAN).
Pyotr Yefimenko – ethnographer and historian
Evgenia Kirichenko – historian of architecture and art
Vasyl Stepanchenko — Soviet  aircraft designer, Hero of Socialist Labor
Antonina Prikhot'ko – experimental physicist
Valery Tereshchenko (academic) - Russian−Soviet academic
Konstantin Buteyko, the creator of the Buteyko method for the treatment of asthma and other breathing disorders
Anatoly Kondratenko – theoretical physicist
Evgeny Dobrenko – historian
Vladimir Marchenko – mathematician
Vladislav Shevchenko - astronomer
Boris Evgenyevich Votchal – Academician of the USSR Academy of Medical Sciences (since 1969), Honored Scientist of the Russian Federation (1966), one of the founders of the clinical pharmacology in Russia
Victor Linetsky – petroleum hydrogeologist
Alexander Andreevich Samarskii – mathematician
Vasily Omeliansky – microbiologist and author of the first original Russian text book on microbiology
Nikolai Cholodny - Soviet microbiologist
Yakub Holovatsky – historian
Nikolay Dikansky – physicist
Nikolai Belelubsky - academic specialising in railway and civil engineering
Boris Struminsky – physicist known for his contribution to theoretical elementary particle physics
Vadym Slyusar – founder of tensor-matrix theory of digital antenna arrays (DAAs), N-OFDM and other theories in fields of radar systems, smart antennas for wireless communications and digital beamforming
Sergiy Vilkomir – computer scientist
Yuri Kivshar – physicist
Stepan Kozhumyaka – engineer, bridge-builder and linguist
Klyment Kvitka – musicologist and ethnographer
Nikolay Gamaleya – Soviet physician and scientist who played a pioneering role in microbiology and vaccine research
Vladimir Dybo – specialist in comparative historical linguistics and accentology
Alexander Bogomolets – pathophysiologist
Vladimir Shcherbina- Soviet geochemist and mineralogist
Boris Grabovsky – one of the pioneers of television, invented the first fully electronic TV set (video transmitting tube and video receiver), which was demonstrated in 1928
Lev Pisarzhevsky – chemist
Sergei Winogradsky – microbiologist, ecologist and soil scientist who pioneered the cycle-of-life concept
Yuri Linnik – Soviet mathematician active in number theory, probability theory and mathematical statistics
Vladimir Lipsky – botanist
Platon Poretsky – noted Russian Imperial astronomer, mathematician, and logician
Daniil Zabolotny – epidemiologist and the founder of the world's first research department of epidemiology
Oleksandr Harmash – Soviet scientist in the field of production line methods in construction (construction engineering)
Fedir Vovk, anthropologist-archaeologist, the curator of the Alexander III Museum in St. Petersburg
Evgeny Paton – Soviet mechanical scientist and engineer, famous for his works in electric welding
Vladimir Betz – anatomist and histologist, famous for the discovery of giant pyramidal neurons of primary motor cortex
Alexander Gorban – physicist and biologist
Kirill Tolpygo – physicist
Mikhail Fedoruk – rector of Novosibirsk State University, Doctor of Physics and Mathematics
Aleksandr Markevich – zoologist, prolific helminthologist and copepodologist
Mikhail Maksimovich – professor in plant biology
Alexander Zaporozhets – Soviet developmental psychologist
Zenon Ivanovich Borevich – mathematician
Vladimir Pravdich-Neminsky – physiologist who published the first EEG and the evoked potential of the mammalian brain
Mikhail Tugan-Baranovsky – economist
Dmitry Grigorovich – Soviet aircraft designer
Viktor Sadovnichiy – mathematician, winner of the 1989 USSR State Prize, and since 1992 he has been the rector of Moscow State University
Osip Bodyansky – Slavist
Pavlo Zhytetsky – linguist, philologist, ethnographer and literary historian, Doctor of Russian Literature (1908)
Eugene Miroshnichenko  - historian
Serhii Plokhy - historian
Pavel Chubinsky – ethnographer and geographer
Mikhail Grushevsky – historian
Anatoly Sagalevich - explorer who, since 1995, has worked at the Shirshov Institute of Oceanology of the Russian Academy of Sciences (USSR Academy of Sciences until 1991)
Anatoly Vishnevsky - demographer and economist
Anatoly Kashpirovsky – psychotherapist, claimed to be a hypnotist and a psychic healer


=== Politics ===

Konstantin Chernenko (1911–1985), leader of Soviet Union from 1984 to 1985
Alexander Bezborodko – Grand Chancellor of Russian Empire and chief architect of Catherine the Great's foreign policy
Alexander Kushelev-Bezborodko - Imperial nobleman and politician
Pyotr Zavadovsky – Russian Imperial statesman
Grigory Kozitsky - Cabinet Secretary of Catherine II
Dmitry Troshchinsky – senior Cabinet Secretary (1793–98), Prosecutor General (1814–17), Privy Councilor, senator, owner of the serf theater
Andrey Razumovsky – Russian Imperial diplomat who spent many years of his life in Vienna
Alexey Razumovsky – Acting Chamberlain (1775), Senator (1776–1807), Minister of Public Education (1810–1816). Active Privy Councillor (1807)
Peter P. Dubrovsky - bibliophile, diplomat, paleographer, secretary of the Russian Embassy in France, collector of manuscripts and books
Viktor Kochubey – Russian statesman and a close aide of Alexander I of Russia
Pyotr Kapnist – Russian Imperial diplomat and ambassador to Austria (1895–1904)
Grigoriy Shcherbina - Russian Imperial diplomat
Vladimir Gurko - government official and a member of the Russian Assembly
Mikhail Rodzianko – chamberlain of the Imperial family, Chairman of the State Duma and one of the leaders of the February Revolution of 1917
Mikhail Tereshchenko – minister of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Provisional Government (1917)
Vladimir Antonov-Ovseyenko – Bolshevik leader and diplomat, one of the leaders of the October Revolution
Pavel Dybenko – Bolshevik revolutionary, one of the leaders of the October Revolution
Alexandra Kollontai – revolutionary, politician, diplomat and Marxist theoretician. Serving as the People's Commissar for Welfare in 1917–1918, she was the first woman in history to become an official member of a governing cabinet.
Nikolai Podvoisky – Bolshevik revolutionary and Soviet statesman, one of the leaders of the October Revolution
Stepan Petrichenko – anarcho-syndicalist politician, de facto leader of the Kronstadt Commune, and the leader of the revolutionary committee which led the Kronstadt rebellion of 1921.
Dmitry Kursky – Prosecutor General of the Russian SFSR (1922–1928)
Gleb Bokii – Bolshevik revolutionary, headed the "special department" of the Soviet secret police apparatus, believed to have been in charge of the Soviet Union's concentration camp system.
Boris Shcherbina, a Soviet politician who served as a vice-chairman of the Council of Ministers from 1984 to 1989.Supervisor of Soviet crisis management during 1986 Chernobyl disaster and the 1988 Armenian earthquake.
Grigory Petrovsky – Old Bolshevik, participated in signing the Treaty on the Creation of the USSR, one of the officials responsible for implementing Stalin's policies such as collectivization.
Vsevolod Balitsky – Soviet official, Commissar of State Security 1st Class (equivalent to Four-star General) of the NKVD and a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
Yakov Malik – Soviet diplomat, Soviet ambassador to the United Kingdom, known for giving the USSR justifications for the occupation of Czechoslovakia at the Security Council in August 1968
Georgy Korniyenko - Soviet diplomat
Efim Shchadenko - Soviet colonel general who served as Deputy People's Commissar of Defense during the early years of World War II
Vyacheslav Kovalenko - diplomat
Ivan Nosenko - People's Commissar for Shipbuilding of the USSR
Yuri Nosenko - KGB officer who defected to US
Ivan Savchenko - Soviet KGB general
Vitaly Yurchenko - KGB officer
Valery Tereshchenko (diplomat) - diplomat and ambassador
Alexander Yakovenko (diplomat) - diplomat
Yuriy Kotsiubynsky – Bolshevik politician
Vasily Shakhrai – political activist and Bolshevik revolutionary during the Russian Revolution, founder of what came to be called National Communism
Dmitry Polyansky – Soviet-Russian statesman who was First Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union from 1965 to 1973. From 1958 to 1962 he was Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Russian SFSR, equivalent to a Premier in of one of the 15 Soviet Socialist Republics that comprised the Soviet Union.
Vladimir Matskevich – Deputy Chairman of the Soviet Council of Ministers;the Ambassador of the Soviet Union to Czechoslovakia
Alexander Zasyadko – Soviet economic, state and party leader
Semyon Sereda – Peoples's Commissar for Agriculture of Soviet Russia
Alexander Tsiurupa – Bolshevik leader, Soviet statesman, Vice Chairman and, later, Chief of food of Soviet Russia
Vasyl' Shakhrai – Bolshevik revolutionary
Nikolai Podgorny, Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR (1965–1977)
Zinovie Serdiuk, Deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, First Secretary of the Moldavian Communist Party
Alexander Danieliuk-Stefanski – member of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party
Pyotr Shelest, Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union, Full member of the 22nd, 23rd, 24th Politburo.
Leonid Korniyets  - Soviet politician
Alexei Kirichenko – Second Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (17 December 1957 – 5 April 1960)
Vladimir Ivashko – Soviet politician, briefly acting as General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Deputy General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (1990–1991)
Nikolai Demchenko – the first deputy commissar of agriculture of the USSR, People's Commissar of Grain and Livestock Farms of the USSR
Ivan Demchenko - deputy of the 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th State Dumas
Stepan Chervonenko – Soviet ambassador to Peking
Igor Gouzenko – cipher clerk for the Soviet embassy to Canada in Ottawa, Ontario
Grigory Grinko – finance minister of the Soviet Union (1930–1937)
Nikolay Gikalo - Soviet revolutionary and statesman.
Viktor Polyanichko – Soviet and Russian diplomat and politician, a people's deputy of the USSR, a people's deputy of the Azerbaijan SSR, a deputy of the Chelyabinsk Regional Council of Workers' Deputies, and a delegate of the 23rd Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union
Vlas Chubar – finance minister of the Soviet Union (1937–1938)
Ivan Kazanets – the minister of ferrous metallurgy of the Soviet Union
Vsevolod Murakhovsky – First Deputy Premier of the Soviet Union during the Gorbachev Era
Vitaly Fedorchuk – KGB officer and Minister of Interior Affairs of the Soviet Union
Nikolai Golushko – KGB officer and the director of the Federal Service of Counter-intelligence of the Russian Federation
Stepan Chervonenko – Soviet ambassador to Peking
Vladimir Chub – the governor of Rostov Oblast in Russia from 1991 until 2010
Vitaly Mukha – politician, who served as the 1st and third Governor of Novosibirsk Oblast from 1991 to 1993 and from 1995 to 2000
Sergey Kiriyenko (half Ukrainian) – Prime Minister of Russia
Sergei Shmatko - Russia's Minister of Energy from May 2008 until May 2012
Aleksandr Skorobogatko – billionaire businessman and former deputy member in the State Duma, having represented the Liberal Democratic Party of Russia (2003–2007) and United Russia (2007–2016)
Andrey Goncharenko, Russian billionaire businessman
Georgy Poltavchenko – former governor of Saint Petersburg
Irina Panchenko - politician and former Member of the State Duma from Chukotka Autonomous Okrug (2003–2007)
Sergey Bidonko - deputy of the 7th and 8th State Duma convocations
Yelena Bondarenko (Russian politician) - Member of the State Duma for Stavropol Krai
Nikolai Bondarenko -  opposition politician and blogger, Member of the Saratov Oblast Duma for the Communist Party
Igor Antropenko - political figure, deputy of the 8th State Duma convocation
Nikolay Alexeyenko  - deputy of the 8th State Duma convocation
Viktor Khristenko – politician who was chairman of the board of the Eurasian Economic Commission (2012–2016); First Deputy Prime Minister of Russia (1999–2000); Minister of Industry (2004–2012)
Sergei Aleksashenko – economist and former government official. He was the deputy finance minister and first deputy chairman of the board of the Central Bank of Russia from 1995 to 1998.
Dmitry Kozak, the Deputy Prime Minister of Russia from 2008 to 2020, Deputy Kremlin Chief of Staff
Alexander Novak – Deputy Prime Minister of Russia since 2020
Sergey Kislyak – Russia's Ambassador to the United States (2008–2017)
Sergey Shakhray – co-author of the Constitution of the Russian Federation
Irina Yarovaya – Deputy Chairman of the State Duma from United Russia Party and a member of United Russia's General Council
Anatoly Brovko – Russian politician who served as the governor of Volgograd Oblast
Viktoria Abramchenko – Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation with responsibility for Agro-Industrial Complex, Natural Resources and Ecology.
Vladimir Timoshenko – career diplomat and is a former ambassador of the Russian Federation to Benin
Alexei Didenko – politician, deputy of the Tomsk Oblast Duma
Aleksandr Drozdenko – economist and politician. He has been Governor of Leningrad Oblast since 28 May 2012.
Andrey Doroshenko - deputy of the 8th State Duma
Sergei Sobko- chairman of the Russian Christian-Social Movement and deputy of the State Duma representing the Communist Party of the Russian Federation
Aleksandr Gamanenko - member of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation
Andrey Andreychenko – member of the State Duma of the VII convocation between 31 May 2017 and 12 October 2021, and a member of the Legislative Assembly of Primorsky Krai of the VI convocation from 18 September 2016 to 24 May 2017.
Andrey Ishchenko – politician who currently serves as a member of parliament in the Legislative Assembly of Primorsky Krai
Yevgeny Nazdratenko – 2nd Governor of Primorsky Krai
Oleg Kozhemyako – the Governor of Primorsky Krai since 2018. Previously he was the Governor of Sakhalin Oblast, Russia.
Andrey Tarasenko – politician and former army officer who is currently the Chairman of the Government of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) since 31 July 2020
Nikolai Kondratenko – politician, long time Governor of Krasnodar Krai, runner-up candidate of the Communist Party (CPRF) in 2003
Vasily Yakemenko  -politician, creator and leader of several pro-government youth groups
Igor Belchuk – politician and businessman who had served as the acting Governor of Primorsky Krai in spring 2001.
Konstantin Chuychenko – politician, businessman, and lawyer who served as the Minister of Justice since 21 January 2020
Dmitry Grigorenko – a Russian politician serving as Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation and Chief of the Government Staff assumed office in January 2020
Vitaly Mutko – politician who served as the Deputy Prime Minister of Russia from 2016 to 2020
Mikhail Murashko – physician and a politician, serving as the Minister of Health of the Russian Federation since 21 January 2020
Gennadiy Onishchenko – government official who was the Chief Sanitary Inspector of Russia from 1996 to 2013
Dmitry Chernyshenko – businessman and politician serving as Deputy Prime Minister of Russia for Tourism, Sport, Culture and Communications since 2020
Alexander Prokopchuk – employee of the internal affairs agencies, head of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation National Central Bureau of Interpol from 14 June 2011, and vice-president of Interpol from 10 November 2016
Alexey Overchuk – politician serving as Deputy Prime Minister of the Russian Federation from 21 January 2020
Valery Limarenko – current Governor of Sakhalin Oblast, a federal subject of Russia from 2018
Vladimir Babenko - first Head of Administration of Tambov Oblast from 1991 to 1995
Alexander Grushko – diplomat, and is currently Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs, since 22 January 2018. Previously, he was the Permanent Representative of Russia to NATO, serving from 2012 to 2018.
Sergey Veremeenko - businessman and politician
Sergey Krivenko - journalist, publicist, and editor
Vladimir Strelchenko -mayor of Khimki since 2005 to 2012
Vladimir Shumeyko – 1st Chairman of the Federation Council, First Deputy Prime Minister
Viktor Tomenko - statesman who is currently serving as the Governor of Altai Krai since 17 September 2018
Boris Tolpygo - Soviet Communist politician,  chairman of the executive committee of Soviet of Lower Amur Oblast in 1936-1938
Albert Krivchenko- political figure who served as the 1st Governor of Amur Oblast
Igor Panchenko - politician who served as a senator from Tula Oblast from 14 October 2021 until his death
Yevgeny Savchenko - Senator of Belgorod Oblast on legislative authority
Taras Khtey – Senator of Belgorod Oblast
Vladimir Dyachenko - Head of Administration of Amur Oblast from 1994 to 1996
Vasily Yurchenko - Governor in Novosibirsk Oblast (2010–2014)
Yury Lyashko - statesman, who had served as the 5th governor of the Amur Oblast from 1996 to 1997. He also served as the 1st mayor of Blagoveshchensk from 1991 to 1996
Sergey Menyaylo - Head of the Republic of North Ossetia since 9 April 2021
Pyotr Marchenko- politician, who was the deputy of the Stavropol Krai Duma, a chairman of the Stavropol Krai Duma committee on security, inter-parliamentary relations, veteran organizations and the Cossacks in 2011–2021
Sergey Levchenko - politician and member of the 8th State Duma
Yekaterina Kharchenko - political figure and deputy of the 8th State Duma
Sergey Ivanenko  - economist and politician
Alexey Kornienko (politician) - political figure and a deputy of the 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th State Dumas
Natalya Kostenko - political figure and deputy of the 7th and 8th State Dumas
Evgeny Gromyko - politician who served as a senator from Krasnodar Krai from 2014 to 2015
Alexander Filipenko - politician, the former governor of Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug
Valery Potapenko - the 5th Governor (Head) of Nenets Autonomous Okrug from 2006 to 2009
Leonid Gorbenko - 2nd Governor of Kaliningrad Oblast in 1996, serving in that office until 2000
Oleg Savchenko (politician, born 1948) - politician and businessman who had served as the second Governor of Kaluga Oblast in 1996
Dmitry Dmitriyenko - former Governor of Murmansk
Oleg Savchenko (politician, born 1966) -  deputy of the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 8th State Dumas
Denis Kravchenko - deputy of the 8th State Duma
Andrey Rostenko - former Mayor of Yalta
Vladimir Rushailo - Minister of Internal Affairs (21 May 1999 – 28 March 2001)
Valentina Petrenko - Senator from Khakassia from 2001 to 2011
Dmitry Vasilenko (politician) - senator from Leningrad Oblast since 7 October 2021
Olga Pilipenko - deputy of the 7th and 8th State Dumas
Tatiana Kusayko - member of the Federation Council between 2016 and 2021 and deputy of the 8th State Duma since 2021
Aleksey Lavrinenko - deputy of the 7th and 8th State Dumas
Mikhail Tarasenko - deputy of the 8th State Duma
Alexander Yushchenko - deputy of the 6th, 7th, and 8th State Dumas
Alexander Teterdinko - deputy of the 8th State Duma
Yevgeny Revenko - deputy of the 7th State and 8th State Dumas
Sergei Storchak -  politician who had former served as the a Deputy Finance Minister of Russia
Nikolay Vinnichenko - federal state civilian service rank of 1st class Active State Councillor of the Russian Federation
Oleg Melnichenko - Chairman of the Federation Council Committee on Federal Structure, Regional Policy, Local Self-Government and Northern Affairs
Vitaliy Khotsenko - Acting Governor of Omsk Oblast since March 2023
Valentina Rudchenko - current Speaker of the Duma of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug
Yevgeny Marchenko (politician) - deputy of the 7th and 8th State Dumas
Andrey Alekseyenko - politician and economist who served as mayor of Krasnodar from 2021 to 2022
Valeriy Raenko - Chairman of the Legislative Assembly of Kamchatka Krai (2011–2021)
Sergey Kravchuk  - politician who is currently the third mayor of Khabarovsk since 25 September 20
Aleksandr Nazarchuk - Minister of Agriculture of Russia (1994–1996)
Oleg Valenchuk - deputy of the 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th State Dumas
Boris Kovalchuk - official who has served as Chairman of the Accounts Chamber of Russia since 2024
Alexander Yaroshuk - Russian Federation Senator from Kaliningrad Oblast
Larisa Opanasyuk - lawyer and politician
Vasily Tarasyuk - Deputy Chairman of the State Duma's Committee on Natural Resources and Utilization
Mikhail Kislyuk - politician who had last served as the 1st Governor of Kemerovo Oblast from 1991 to 1997
Sergey Smetanyuk - politician who lasted served as the acting Governor of Tyumen Oblast in November 2005, and the head of the Tyumen administration from 2005 to 2007
Ilya Seredyuk - Governor of Kemerovo Oblast since 15 May 2024
Ruslan Kukharuk - acting governor of Khanty–Mansi Autonomous Okrug since 30 May 2024
Andrey Golovatyuk - member for the LDPR of the State Duma of Russia
Nikolay Olshansky -  senator from Voronezh Oblast from 2011 to 2013
Mikhail Prusak - governor of Novgorod Oblast from 1991 to 2007
Tatiana Lobach - deputy of the 8th State Duma
Nikolay Maksyuta - governor of Volgograd Oblast from 1997 to 2010
Dmitry Belik – politician who is currently a member of parliament in the State Duma of the VII convocation, a member of the United Russia party, and a member of the State Duma committee on control and regulations and a member since 5 October 2016
Vladimir Medinsky – Russia's Minister of Culture (2012–2020)
Natalia Poklonskaya – politician, diplomat, serving as deputy head of Rossotrudnichestvo since 2 February 2022
Alexei Navalny – Russian opposition leader, lawyer, and anti-corruption activist
Andrii Derkach - Member of the Russian Federation Council, former member of Verkhovna Rada (1998–2020)
Konstantin Basyuk - Senator
Yury Savenko - 3rd Mayor of Kaliningrad (11 November 1998 – 7 November 2007)
Valery Usatyuk - politician, who is currently the member of the Federation Council representing the executive branch of the Republic of Khakassia, and a member of the Federation Council Committee on Defense and Security from 2018 to 2023
Galina Munzuk - politician who served as a senator from Tuva from 2011 to 2014
Stepan Kirichuk - politician and former railway worker who has been a member of the Tyumen City Duma since 9 September 2018
Nikolay Kondratyuk (politician) - Senator of the executive authority of Penza Oblast since 21 December 2021
Alexander Aksyonenko - Member of the State Duma for Novosibirsk Oblast
Maksim Mishchenko - politician, deputy of the State Duma, founder and leader of the youth movement Young Russia
Nikolai Semashko – Russian politician, Minister of Health of Soviet Union
Yury Nimchenko - military officer and politician serving as the senator from Crimea since 12 September 2024
Aleksey Kondratenko - politician serving as a senator from Krasnodar Krai since 22 September 2015
Vitaly Nazarenko - politician serving as a senator from North Ossetia–Alania since 25 September 2018
Vyacheslav Timchenko (politician) - politician serving as a senator from Kirov Oblast since 2014, currently serving on legislative authority as of 2016
Dmitry Vasilenko (politician) - politician serving as a senator from Leningrad Oblast since 7 October 2021
Andrey Anatolyevich Shevchenko - politician, who is currently the senator of legislative authority of Orenburg Oblast in the Federation Council since 27 September 2016, and is the Chairman of the Federation Council Committee on the Federal Structure, Regional Policy, Local Self-Government and Affairs of the North
Vladimir Kravchenko (politician) - politician serving as a senator from Tomsk Oblast since 14 October 2021
Vitaly Ignatenko - journalist and politician who had been the head of ITAR-TASS news agency from 1993 until 2012 and had served in the cabinet of Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin from 1995 to 1997 as deputy prime minister
Alexey Dmitrienko - politician who served as a senator from Penza Oblast from 2016 to 2020
Anastasia Rybachenko -  member of the Political Council, the head of the Youth Committee and a spokesperson with the Moscow branch of the "Solidarnost" movement from March 2008 to June 2012
Yelena Zlenko - politician who is a member of the Federation Council from the executive authority of Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug since 18 September 2018
Sergei Prikhodko (politician) - First Deputy Head of the Russian Government Office (19 May 2018 – 26 January 2021)
Vladimir Litvinenko - academic, businessman and Vladimir Putin's campaign manager
Viktor Gerashchenko - Chairman of the State Bank of the USSR, then Governor of the Bank of Russia during much of the Perestroika and post-Perestroika periods
Olga Litvinenko - ex-politician
Yelena Drapeko - actress and Member of the State Duma for Saint Petersburg
Vasily Nebenzya - diplomat and the current Permanent Representative of Russia to the United Nations


=== Cosmonauts ===

Georgy Beregovoy, Soviet cosmonaut No.12, Soviet MP in 1974–89 representing Donetsk region
Leonid Kizim, Soviet cosmonaut
Yuri Romanenko, Soviet cosmonaut
Georgy Grechko, Soviet cosmonaut
Anatoly Levchenko, Soviet cosmonaut
Anatoly Filipchenko, Soviet cosmonaut
Oleg Grigoriyevich Kononenko, Soviet cosmonaut
Valentin Bondarenko, Soviet cosmonaut
Anatoly Artsebarsky, Soviet cosmonaut
Igor Volk, Soviet cosmonaut
Pavel Popovich, Soviet cosmonaut No.4, Verkhovna Rada MP in 1964–88, head of Ukrainian diaspora in Moscow
Georgy Dobrovolsky, Soviet cosmonaut
Aleksandr Poleshchuk, Russian cosmonaut
Roman Romanenko, Russian  cosmonaut
Yury Onufriyenko, Russian cosmonaut
Yuri Malenchenko, Russian cosmonaut
Andrey Borisenko, Russian cosmonaut
Yuri Gidzenko, Russian cosmonaut


=== Military ===

Petro Doroshenko – Hetman of Right-Bank Ukraine (1665–1672) and a Russian voivode
Maksym Zalizniak - Cossack and leader of the Koliivshchyna rebellion
Alexander Lebed – late Lieutenant General of Russia, 1996 Presidential candidate (Ukrainian origin)
Alexei Razumovsky – Field marshal of Russian Imperial Army
Kirill Razumovski – Field marshal of Russian Imperial Army
Dmitry Neverovsky - military officer and general who served in the Russo-Turkish War and the Napoleonic Wars
Peter Kaptzevich - general who participated in the Napoleonic Wars
Nikolai Linevich – career military officer, General of Infantry (1903) and Adjutant general in the Imperial Russian Army in the Far East during the latter part of the Russo-Japanese War.
Alexander Mikhailovsky-Danilevsky - Russian Imperial military figure
Ivan Gudovich – Russian noble and military leader
Vasily Zavoyko – an admiral in the Russian Imperial navy, In 1854, during the Crimean War, he led the successful defence against the Siege of Petropavlovsk by the allied British-French troops
Pavel Mishchenko – Imperial Russian career military officer and statesman of the Imperial Russian Army
Iosif Gurko - prominent Russian field marshal during the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)
Vasily Gurko - Chief-of-Staff of the Imperial Russian Army before being forced out of the country in exile following the October Revolution of 1917
Ivan Grigorovich served as Imperial Russia's last Naval Minister from 1911 until the onset of the 1917 revolution.
Roman Kondratenko – general in the Imperial Russian Army famous for his devout defense of Port Arthur during the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–1905
Alexey Schastny – Russian naval commander during World War I
Yuriy Tyutyunnyk - Russian Imperial Officer
Ivan Kozhedub – Soviet World War II fighter ace, considered to be the highest-scoring Soviet and Allied fighter pilot of World War II
Pavel Rybalko – commander of armoured troops in the Red Army during and following World War II.
Alexei Berest – Soviet political officer and one of the three Red Army soldiers who hoisted the Victory Banner
Ivan Bezugly - Soviet Red Army officer who served as commander of the Red Army's 5th Airborne Corps in 1941, the first airborne corps of the Red Army to fight in World War II after the German invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941
Fedor Zinchenko – Soviet officer who commanded the 150th Rifle Division's 756th Regiment during the Storming of the Reichstag.
Dmitry Lavrinenko – Soviet tank commander and Hero of the Soviet Union. He was the highest scoring tank ace of the Allies during World War II.
Alexander Marinesko – Soviet naval officer and, during World War II, the captain of the submarine S-13 which sank the German military transport ship Wilhelm Gustloff. The most successful Soviet submarine commander in terms of gross register tonnage (GRT) sunk.
Dmitry Lelyushenko, Soviet military commander, his final actions in 1945 involved directing forces during the Red Army's attacks on both Berlin and Prague.
Kuzma Derevyanko – general of the Red Army. He was the representative of the Soviet Union at the ceremonial signing of the written agreement that established the armistice ending the Pacific War, and with it World War II
Semyon Timoshenko – Marshal of the Soviet Union
Andrey Yeryomenko – Soviet general during World War II and, subsequently, a Marshal of the Soviet Union
Panteleimon Ponomarenko – a Soviet statesman and politician and one of the leaders of Soviet partisan resistance during WW2
Alexander Utvenko – Red Army Lieutenant general
Matvey Kononenko - Soviet general
Feofan Parkhomenko - Soviet general
Ivan Sidorovich Lazarenko - Red Army major general and a posthumous Hero of the Soviet Union
Fedir Dyachenko – Soviet sniper during World War II, credited with as many as 425 kills.
Nikolai Pinchuk (pilot) – Soviet fighter pilot and flying ace during World War II who totaled 20 solo and 2 shared aerial victories
Kirill Moskalenko – marshal of the Soviet Union
Ivan Taranenko – Soviet fighter pilot, flying ace, and regimental commander in World War II who went on to become a general
Sergei Rudenko (general) – Soviet Marshal of the aviation
Petro Hryhorenko - Soviet Army general, professor of cybernetics at the Frunze Military Academy and chairman of its cybernetic section who became a dissident and a writer
Vasily Khomenko - Soviet army commander, and lieutenant general
Prokofy Romanenko - Soviet general
Grigory Panchenko - Soviet Army major general and a Hero of the Soviet Union who held divisional commands during World War II
Grigory Kulik – marshal of the Soviet Union
Trofim Kolomiets - Soviet Army commander
Pyotr Koshevoy – Soviet military commander and a Marshal of the Soviet Union
Alexei Burdeinei – Soviet general
Pavel Batitsky – Soviet military leader awarded the highest honorary title of Hero of the Soviet Union in 1965 and promoted to Marshal of the Soviet Union in 1968
Alexei Radzievsky - professional soldier of the Soviet Union who fought in the Second World War, commanding the 2nd Guards Tank Army during the Lublin–Brest offensive and afterwards
Ivan Pavlovsky - Soviet military leader, Commander-in-Chief Ground Forces - Deputy Minister of Defense of the Soviet Union (1967–1980), and a General of the Army (1967)
Anatoly Petrakovsky - Soviet Army major general and Hero of the Soviet Union
Ivan Moshlyak – Soviet major general who received the highest honorary title of Hero of the Soviet Union in 1938 for his heroism during the Battle of Lake Khasan
Pyotr Gnido – Soviet fighter pilot during World War II who was credited with 34 solo and 6 shared aerial victories, and recipient of the title of Hero of Soviet Union
Stepan Rybalchenko - Soviet Air Force colonel-general
Sergey Fomenko, Soviet general
Nikolay Dyatlenko – Soviet officer, interrogator and translator who was part of a team that attempted to deliver a message of truce (sometimes referred to as an "ultimatum") to the German Sixth Army at the Battle of Stalingrad in January 1943
Grigory Kravchenko – test pilot who became a flying ace and twice Hero of the Soviet Union in Asia before the start of Operation Barbarossa
Mikhail Grigoryevich Bondarenko - captain-lieutenant in Soviet Navy during World War II who was awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union for his actions in the Kerch-Eltigen operation
Nikita Lebedenko - Soviet Army lieutenant general and a Hero of the Soviet Union
Nikolay Lebedenko - 20th century Imperial Russian military engineer
Mikhail Ivanovich Bondarenko (1901–1943) - artillerist of the Soviet Army during World War II
Mariya Borovichenko - Soviet medical officer
Grigory Mitrofanovich Davidenko - Soviet soldier, Hero of the Soviet Union (1944)
Vasily Davidenko (general) - Soviet military figure, Hero of the Soviet Union (1943)
Aleksandr Gorgolyuk - Soviet fighter pilot in World War II
Ivan Dubovoy - Soviet Army major general of tank forces and a Hero of the Soviet Union
Aleksey Burdeyny - Soviet colonel general who held corps command during World War II
Stepan Borozenets - Soviet Air Force colonel and a Hero of the Soviet Union
Yakov Novichenko - Soviet military officer
Ivan Golubets – Soviet sailor with the Black Sea Fleet
Vladimir Sudets – Soviet air commander during World War II, commanding the 17th Air Army, and later became Marshal of the aviation after the war
Pyotr Vershigora – one of the leaders of the Soviet partisan movement in Ukraine, Belarus and Poland
Pyotr Braiko – Soviet soldier during the Second World War who gained the status of Hero of the Soviet Union following the conflict
Vasyl Herasymenko – Soviet military leader
Nikolai Reznichenko- military officer
Anatoly Nikolayevich Levchenko  - Soviet fighter pilot in the 655th Fighter Aviation Regiment of the 40th Army of the Turkestan Military District during the Soviet–Afghan War
Oleg Koshevoy – Soviet partisan and one of the founders of the clandestine organization Young Guard, which fought the Nazi forces in Krasnodon during World War II between 1941 and 1945
Mikhail Tsiselsky – Soviet naval pilot during World War II who was awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Ivan Turkenich – Soviet partisan, one of the leaders of the underground anti-Nazi organization Young Guard, which operated in Krasnodon district during World War II between 1941 and 1944
Dmitry Glinka (aviator) – Soviet flying ace during World War II who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union for his achievements, having scored 50 individual aerial victories by the end of the war.
Boris Glinka – Soviet flying ace during World War II with over 20 solo shootdowns.
Vasily Mykhlik – Ilyushin Il-2 pilot and squadron commander in the 566th Assault Aviation Regiment of the Soviet Air Forces during the Second World War who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union.
Alexey Perelet - Soviet pilot who was the principal test pilot for military aircraft prototypes produced by Tupolev during World War II.
Leonid Beda – ground-attack squadron commander in the Soviet Air Forces during the Second World War who went on to become a Lieutenant-General of Aviation.
Pavel Dubinda – sergeant in the Red Army during World War II and one of only four people that was both a full bearer of the Order of Glory and Hero of the Soviet Union
Nikolai Simoniak – General in the Soviet Army during World War II
Yuri Shvets – KGB officer
Yepifan Kovtyukh – Soviet corps commander
Ivan Mashchenko - Red Army colonel
Ivan Kharchenko - Soviet Army engineering colonel
Sergey Sheyko – Hero of the Russian Federation, is a colonel in Russian Naval Infantry
Boris Dumenko – Red Army commander during the Russian Civil War
Alexander Kravchenko (revolutionary) – revolutionary, agronomist and partisan who fought against Admiral Kolchak's White forces in Siberia in 1919 during the Russian Civil War
Grigory Skiruta – WWII Red Army officer
Andrey Baklan - Soviet flying ace during World War II
Mikhail Badyuk - Soviet aviator in the 9th Guards Mine Torpedo Aviation Regiment of the 5th Mine-Torpedo Air Division in the Northern Fleet's aviation division during the Second World War
Ivan Afanasenko - Red Army Sergeant and a Hero of the Soviet Union
Zakhar Slyusarenko – WWII tank officer and brigade commander, twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Bogdan Stashinsky – KGB officer and spy who assassinated the Ukrainian nationalist leaders in the late 1950s
Yan Chernyak - World War II era spy who led a network of several dozen people in Germany working for the Soviet Union's military intelligence, the GRU
Ivan Stepanenko – Soviet WWII flying ace with over 30 solo victories
Fyodor Arkhipenko - flying ace of the Soviet Air Force during the Second World War and recipient of the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Vladimir Sudets – Soviet WWII air commander, later marshal of aviation
Pavel Sudoplatov, NKVD officer, lieutenant general of the MVD, who became involved in several famous episodes, including the assassination of Leon Trotsky in 1940, the Soviet espionage program which obtained information about the atomic bomb from the Manhattan Project, and Operation Scherhorn in 1944
Stepan Suprun – Soviet test pilot who tested over 140 aircraft types during his career
Stanislav Jermak - military man and rocket and space systems scientist
Pavel Taran – WWII Il-4 pilot, twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Ivan Taranenko – Soviet WWII fighter ace, later a general
Semyon Timoshenko – Marshal of the Soviet Union
Grigory Tkhor – Soviet aviator, Spanish Civil War and Second Sino-Japanese War volunteer, and major general of the Soviet Air Force
Sergei Trofimenko – Soviet military commander, active in the Russian Civil War and Second World War
Andrey Titenko - Soviet soldier who served during World War II and recipient of the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Galina Dzhunkovskaya - squadron navigator in 125th Guards Dive Bomber Regiment during the Second World War who was honored with the title Hero of the Soviet Union on 18 August 1945
Mikhail Tsiselsky – Soviet WWII naval pilot, awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Nikolai Martynyuk - Soviet naval officer
Ivan Turkenich – Soviet partisan, a leaders of the anti-Nazi Young Guard during WWII
Yelena Ubiyvovk – WWII partisan and leader of a Komsomol cell
Nina Ulyanenko – navigator, pilot and flight commander in the women's 46th Taman Guards Night Bomber Aviation Regiment
Nikolai Usenko – Red Army soldier, Hero of the Soviet Union
Valentina Kravchenko - squadron navigator during World War II and Hero of the Russian Federation
Nikolai Semeyko – Soviet Il-2 pilot and navigator during World War II who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union.
Grigory Vakulenchuk – sailor, organizer, and leader of the uprising on the Russian battleship Potemkin
Pyotr Vershigora – Soviet partisan leader in Ukraine, Belarus and Poland
Andrey Vitruk – Soviet Air Force general
Aleksey Mitrofanovich Vlasenko - Soviet general
Ilya Arkhipovich Vlasenko - Hero of the Soviet Union (1943)
Polina Osipenko – Soviet military pilot
Alexander Osipenko (pilot) - Soviet military aviator and, according to some accounts, the Soviet Air Forces' top ace in the Spanish Civil War
Timofei Strokach – prominent military figure of the Soviet NKVD and KGB
Ilya Amvrosievich Strokach – prominent military figure of the Soviet NKVD and KGB
Oleg Ostapenko – the former director of Roscosmos, the federal space agency, retired Colonel General in the Russian Military, former Deputy Minister of Defence, and former commander of the Aerospace Defence Forces
Fyodor Ostashenko - Soviet Army lieutenant general and a Hero of the Soviet Union
Vladimir Sergeyevich Vysotsky – Russian admiral and Commander of the Russian Northern Fleet
Viktor Yanukovych – fourth President of Ukraine
Viktor Yanukovych Jr – Ukrainian politician and Member of Parliament
Nikolai Yegipko – Soviet Navy officer, Hero of the Soviet Union
Iosif Apanasenko – Soviet division commander
Fyodor Kostenko – Soviet corps and army commander
Ivan Drachenko – Soviet Il-2 pilot and the only aviator awarded both the title Hero of the Soviet Union and been a full bearer of the Order of Glory.
Vitaly Zakharchenko – Former Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine
Yekaterina Zelenko – WWII Soviet Su-2 pilot, flew during Winter War
Yakov Cherevichenko – Soviet military leader and colonel general
Kornei Andrusenko - Soviet colonel
Nikolai Tsymbal - Soviet military officer
Stepan Artyomenko – the commander of a battalion of the 447th Rifle Regiment in the Red Army during the Second World War, who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Ivan Boyko – the commander of the 69th Guards Tank Regiment and later the 64th Guards Tank Brigade during World War II; he was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union for his successful combat leadership
Ivan Zaporozhets – Soviet security officer and official of the OGPU-NKVD
Nikolai Zhugan - Air Force major general, a pilot during World War II, and Hero of the Soviet Union (1944)
Vasily Zavoyko – Russian admiral, successfully defended against the Siege of Petropavlovsk
Yevgeniya Zhigulenko – WWII Soviet Air Force pilot and navigator, Hero of the Soviet Union
Filipp Zhmachenko – Soviet Army general, Hero of the Soviet Union
Yakov Fedorenko, Soviet general during World War II
Nikolai Lyashchenko - Soviet Army general
Gordey Levchenko - Soviet naval commander and admiral
Irina Levchenko – medic turned tank officer in the Red Army during World War II who was awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union in 1965; she was also the first Soviet woman awarded the Florence Nightingale Medal
Aleksandra Samusenko – Soviet T-34 tank commander and a liaison officer during World War II
Fyodor Zozulya – admiral of the Soviet Navy
Georgy Zozulya – WWII ground-attack pilot in the Soviet Air Force
Andrei Girich – Soviet Air Force major general and Hero of the Soviet Union
Anatoly Kvochur - Soviet and Russian test pilot
Konstantin Kobets - army general
Andrei Paliy – naval officer who served as the deputy commander of the Black Sea Fleet
Aleksandr Chaiko – army officer who is currently the commander of the Eastern Military District since 12 November 2021
Arseniy Golovko - Soviet admiral
Aleksandr Golovko – colonel general in the Russian military and commander of the Russian Space Forces since 1 August 2015
Aleksandr Vitko - retired officer of the Russian Navy, and a former commander of the Russian Black Sea Fleet between April 2013 and June 2018
Sergey Kuralenko - military commander serving as the Head of the Main Directorate of Military Police of the Ministry of Defense of Russia
Pavel Klimenko - major general
Nikolai Krivoruchko - Russian and Soviet soldier
Alexander Prokhorenko - Russian Spetsnaz officer
Gennady Zhidko - colonel general of the Russian Armed Forces, was awarded the title Hero of the Russian Federation in 2017 for his service as chief of staff of Russian forces deployed to Syria
Dmitry Klimenko - artillery officer and military commander, participant in the first and second Chechen wars, Hero of the Russian Federation (2000)
Igor Tkachenko - military pilot with the rank of Colonel, Russian Knights group leader, Chief of the 237th Guards Aviation Showing Center of the Russian Air Force at Kubinka air base
Valery Solodchuk – officer of the Russian Army
Sergei Pinchuk – officer of the Russian Navy, currently holds the rank of vice-admiral, and is deputy commander in chief of the Black Sea Fleet
Alexander Romanchuk – colonel general in the Russian Armed Forces
Igor Smolyak - Rear-Admiral, and served as commander of the Leningrad Naval Base between 2015 and 2016, and as commander of the Nakhimov Black Sea Higher Naval School between 2016 and 2017
Anatoly Nedbaylo – Il-2 pilot in the 75th Guards Assault Aviation Regiment of the Soviet Air Forces during the Second World War who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Vasily Mykhlik – Ilyushin Il-2 pilot and squadron commander in the 566th Assault Aviation Regiment of the Soviet Air Forces during the Second World War who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Ilya Mazuruk - Soviet pilot and polar explorer
Ivan Moshlyak - major general in the Soviet Army who received the title Hero of the Soviet Union for his heroism in the Battle of Lake Khasan during the Soviet–Japanese border conflicts
Alexander Molodchy – Soviet long-range pilot who flew over 300 missions on the B-25, Il-4, and Yer-2 during World War II, WHO was the first person twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union during the war while alive
Arkady Kovachevich - Soviet flying ace and regimental commander during World War II who went on to become a general-lieutenant
Ivan Mikhailichenko – Il-2 pilot in the Soviet Air Forces during the Second World War who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Aleksey Mazurenko – commander of the 7th Guards Assault Aviation Regiment in the Black Sea Fleet during World War II, who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union during the war and remained in the military afterwards, reaching the rank of General-major
Vasilisa Pashchenko - radio operator in the Soviet Air Force during World War II who was posthumously awarded the title Hero of the Russian Federation in 2021.
Andrey Kravchenko (general) – commander of multiple tank units of the Red Army throughout World War II who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Ivan Yakovlevich Kravchenko - Red Army major and a Hero of the Soviet Union
Sergey Kramarenko (pilot) - Soviet Air Force officer who fought in World War II and the Korean War
Stepan Naumenko - Soviet MiG-15 pilot during the Korean War, credited as the first Soviet ace in the conflict
Vyacheslav Naumenko - Kuban Cossack leader
Alexander Mironenko - Soviet airborne senior sergeant and posthumous Hero of the Soviet Union
Dmitry Onuprienko - Soviet Army lieutenant general and Hero of the Soviet Union
Nikolai Onoprienko - Red Army colonel and World War II Hero of the Soviet Union
Yevdokiya Nosal - junior lieutenant and deputy squadron commander in the 588th Night Bomber Regiment (nicknamed the "Night Witches" by the Germans) during World War II
Semyon Kozak – Soviet Army lieutenant general who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union for his command of a division during World War II
Mikhail Bondarenko (pilot) – navigator and squadron commander in the 198th Assault Aviation Regiment of the Soviet Air Forces during the Second World War who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union for his ground-attack sorties on the Il-2 during the war
Ivan Sidorenko  - Red Army officer and a Hero of the Soviet Union, who served during World War II
Yevdokiya Pasko - Soviet military pilot
Vladimir Aleksenko – ground-attack aviation squadron and regimental commander during World War II who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Stepan Suprun – Soviet test pilot who tested over 140 aircraft types during his career, who was also a fighter pilot and twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Vasily Senko – Soviet Air Force colonel and the only navigator who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union
Vasili Yanchenko – World War I flying ace credited with 16 aerial victories
Ivan Loiko – World War I flying ace credited with six confirmed aerial victories
Aleksei Gordeyevich Yeryomenko (1906–1942), Soviet military officer pictured in a famous World War II photograph
Pavel Taran – Il-4 pilot who was twice awarded the title Hero of the Soviet Union during World War II
Yevgraf Kruten – World War I flying ace credited with seven aerial victories


=== Business ===
Oleksiy Alchevsky – industrialist, established the first finance group in Russia.
Viktor Bout – arms dealer
Georgy Vasilchenko - sexologist
Leonid Fedun – billionaire businessman
Yury Kovalchuk – billionaire businessman and financier who is "reputed to be Vladimir Putin's personal banker"
Mikhail Kovalchuk - physicist and official
Alexander Ponomarenko – billionaire businessman who made his fortune in banking, sea ports, commercial real estate and airport construction
Andrey Melnichenko – billionaire entrepreneur
Vladimir Stolyarenko - banker
Serhiy Kurchenko – businessman and founder/owner of the group of companies "Gas Ukraine 2009" specializing in trading of liquefied natural gas. Kurchenko is also the former owner and president of FC Metalist Kharkiv and the Ukrainian Media Holding group.Since 2014 lives in Russia.
Viacheslav Suprunenko -  major shareholder of ASVIO BANK, owner of asset management company ASVIO and president of law firm "Pravozahisnyk"
Dmitry Gerasimenko – businessman, industrialist
Vladimir Ivanenko – businessman, founded first private cable and television network in USSR
Artur Kirilenko – entrepreneur, property developer
Sergei Magnitsky – Ukrainian-born Russian tax advisor and prisoner
Viktor Petrik – businessman
Petro Prokopovych – founder of commercial beekeeping and the inventor of the first movable frame hive
Vladimir Kovalevsky – statesman, scientist and entrepreneur
Boris Kamenka – entrepreneur and banker in the Russian Empire. He was one of the richest people in Russia before the Russian Revolution.


=== Other ===

Gennady Alferenko
Valeria Ivanenko
Petro Oliynik
Oleksandr Opanasenko
Anastasia Prokopenko
Oleg Sukhoruchenko
Vitaly Teslenko
Nikolai Usenko
Aleksey Yakimenko
Dmitri Yaroshenko
Kostyantyn Zhevago
Alexander Shlemenko


== See also ==
Demographics of Russia
Ukrainian diaspora
Russians in Ukraine
Ukrainians in Siberia


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Kubiyovych, Volodymyr. Entsykolpedia Ukrainoznavstva. Vol. 7.
Українське козацтво - Енциклопедія - Kyiv, 2006
Zaremba, S. (1993). From the national-cultural life of Ukrainians in the Kuban (1920 and 1930s). Kyivska starovyna. pp. 94–104.
Lanovyk, B.; et al. (1999). Ukrainian Emigration: from the past to the present. Ternopil.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)
Petrenko, Y. (1993). Ukrainian cossackdom. Kyivska starovyna. pp. 114–119.
Польовий Р. Кубанська Україна К. Дiокор 2003.
Ratuliak, V. (1996). Notes from the history of Kuban from historic times until 1920. Krasnodar.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)
Сергійчук В. Українізація Росії К. 2000
Internet site for Ukrainians in Russia
Зав'ялов А. В. Соціальна адаптація українських іммігрантів : монографія / А. В. Зав'ялов. — Київ : Саміт-книга, 2020. — 180 с.
Завьялов А. В. Социальная адаптация украинских иммигрантов : монография / А. В. Завьялов. – Иркутск : Изд-во ИГУ, 2017. – 179 с.


== External links ==
Zavialov, A. Ukrainian Catastrophe: Ukrainians and the Ukrainian Language in Russia in the Mirror of 1989–2021 Russian Censuses. (2024)
Races of Europe 1942–1943 (in English)
Hammond's Racial map of Europe 1923 (in English)
Peoples of Europe / Die Voelker Europas 1914 (in German)
Ethnographic map of Europe 1914 (in English)
Ukrainians of Russia by number, sex and share in the population structure, 1926–2010 censuses (in Russian)
Ukrainian language knowledge in Russia by ethnic groups (in Russian)
Ukrainians of Russia by their native language, 2010 (in Russian)
Ukrainians of Russia by languages knowledge, 2002, 2010 (in Russian)
Distribution of the Ukrainian population of Russia by age and sex, 2010 (in Russian)
Завьялов А. В. Социальная адаптация украинских иммигрантов : монография / А. В. Завьялов. – Иркутск : Изд-во ИГУ, 2017. – 179 с. (tables The Ukrainian language knowledge by Russian regions, 2010 и Ukrainians in the population structure of Russian regions, 1897–2010) (in Russian)