The Underground House in Ward, Colorado, was a subterranean dwelling known for its architectural design, which embraced the concept of underground living. The house was designed by architect  Julian "Jay" Swayze (1923–1981) in the 1960s. The dwelling is an example of an unconventional approach to residential construction and integration with the natural environment. It was included in the Underground World Home exhibit at the 1964 New York World's Fair.


== History ==
In 1964, Girard Henderson had an underground home built on a 320 acres (130 ha) mountain ranch located near Ward, Colorado. 
The construction was completed by builders Julian "Jay" and Kenneth Swayze, from Plainview, Texas. The Swayze brothers established a company known as Underground World Homes, specializing in the design and construction of full-sized underground residences. On May 13, 1963, Swayze initiated the process of securing a patent for his underground home design. Patent US3227061A was officially granted to Swayze on January 4, 1966, recognizing the underground home concept. This patent marked a milestone in the development of underground dwelling technologies. Swayze's approach led them to create various underground homes, including one that Jay Swayze resided in with his wife and two daughters called Atomitat. It was the first home in the U.S. to meet civil defense specifications for a nuclear shelter. Henderson became intrigued by the idea and decided to invest, acquiring a 51 percent share of Underground World Homes.
During that same year, Henderson undertook the construction of an almost identical underground home, sponsoring the Underground World Home exhibit at the 1964 New York World's Fair, copying the concept pioneered by the Swayze brothers.
Henderson and his wife spent time on the property.

The Swayze brothers authored a book titled Underground Gardens & Homes: The best of two worlds, above and below. Published in 1980, the book delved into the nuclear age, addressing the imperative need for comprehensive planning to safeguard ourselves from potential adverse consequences. 
Situated twenty-eight miles (45 km) northwest of Boulder, Colorado and at an elevation of 9,500 ft (2,900 m) above sea level, the dwelling, dubbed "Mountain Home" by its contractors, employed a building technique known as "ship-in-a-bottle", that deployed mountain top removal, followed by the pouring of a concrete shell, and finally the reinstatement of the mountain top.


== Design ==

The Ranch-style house one-level 3,400 sq ft (320 m2) underground earth shelter was designed to blend with the surroundings with earth against the walls and on the roof. It had a brick veneer siding but was enclosed in a waterproof concrete shell and covered with a compacted earth berm. The entrance was created to look like an opening to a mineshaft. To make the house functional, over $104,000 (equivalent to $1,054,395 in 2024) was spent on the hydroelectric system that supplied the underground dwelling with power. Water for the system flowed from glacial snowpack on Mt. Audubon. More than $200,000 (equivalent to $2,027,682 in 2024 was spent in total to make the house livable.
To imitate the comforts of above-ground living, the wood-frame home had three-bedrooms, a swimming pool, and fake "outdoor" patio. Because the house had no window, artist Jewell Smith painted Trompe-l'œil murals depicting the New York City skyline from the living room and the Golden Gate Bridge from a bedroom. Windows within the structure revealed a narrow corridor that served as a separation between the "exterior" wall and the concrete retaining wall. As noted by architecture historian Beatriz Colomina in her book, Domesticity at War, this architectural element disrupted the conventional notions of inside and outside. The house had a remote-controlled lighting system that could imitate the night sky and sunrise. Additionally, a fireplace channeled smoke through a fake tree trunk to the surface.


== Current State ==
After Henderson died on November 16, 1983, the Colorado mountain property, including the underground home, was put up for sale for $1.5 million dollars. It was purchased for $1.17 million by the Sacred Mountain Ashram on June 9, 1988 from a mysterious reclusive millionaire who was "terrified...of being caught in a nuclear holocaust." After the sale, the exterior walls of the underground house were dug free of dirt, windows were built to allow sunlight to come into the home.


== See also ==
Underground World Home
Underground living
Earth shelter
1964 New York World's Fair
List of lakes of Colorado
Underground House Las Vegas


== Publications ==
Alexander Dawson School, Nothing Without Labor of Love of the Land, Alexander Dawson School, Lafayette, Colorado, 2012
Colorado Mountain Hideaway, Previews Inc., Denver, Colorado, 1986
Add A Fourth "R"...Responsibility, Colorado Junior Republic School, Lafayette, Colorado, ca. 1973
CJR Health Education Center, Alexander Dawson School, Lafayette, Colorado
The Hub, The Colorado Junior Republic, Volume 2, 1973-1974


== References ==
 


== External links ==

New York World's Fair, Underground World Home Brochure