Valery (French: [valeri]) is a male given name and occasional surname. It is derived from the Latin name Valerius. The Slavic given name Valeriy or Valeri is prevalent in Russia and derives directly from the Latin.


== Given name ==
Valery Afanassiev, Russian pianist and author
Valery V. Afanasyev, Russian hockey coach
Valery Asratyan (1958–1996), Soviet serial killer
Valery Belenky, Azerbaijani-German former Olympic artistic gymnast
Valeriy Belousov, Russian decathlete
Valeri Bojinov, Bulgarian international footballer
Valery Bryusov, Russian poet
Valeri Bukrejev, Estonian pole vaulter
Valeri Bure, Russian ice hockey player
Valery Chekalov (1976–2023), Russian mercenary leader
Valeriy Chernyshev (born 1944), Russian chemist
Valery Chkalov, Russian aircraft test pilot
Valery Gazzaev, Russian football manager
Valery Gerasimov, Russian General, the current Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Russia, and first Deputy Defence Minister. He was appointed by President Vladimir Putin on 9 November 2012. Strategist who conceived the "Gerasimov doctrine" which is currently prevalent in Russian military strategy.
Valery Gergiev, Ossetian-Russian conductor
Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, president of the French Republic
Valeriy Gridnev, Russian painter
Valery Jacobi, Russian painter
Valery Karasyov, former Olympic artistic gymnast
Valeri Karpin, Russian football player
Valeri Kharlamov, Russian former Olympic hockey player
Valery Kerdemelidi, former Olympic artistic gymnast
Valery Khodemchuk (1951–1986), Soviet engineer and first victim of the Chernobyl Disaster
Valery Kipelov, Russian heavy metal singer and composer (former member of Aria (band) and current leader of Kipelov bands)
Valeri Kois, Estonian politician
Valery Larbaud, French author
Valeriy Lebed, Ukrainian professional footballer
Valery Legasov, Russian scientist. He was the chief of the investigation committee of the Chernobyl disaster.
Valery Leontiev, Russian pop singer
Valery Likhodey, Russian basketball player
Valeri Liukin, Kazakh-American former Olympic artistic gymnast and current gymnastics coach. Father of Nastia Liukin
Valeriy Lobanovskyi, Ukrainian football manager
Valery Meladze, Russian pop singer
Valery Mezhlauk, Latvian-German and former chairman of GOSPLAN from 1934 to 1937
Valeri Nichushkin, Russian NHL hockey player
Valery Ortiz, Puerto Rican actress
Valeri Polyakov, Russian former Cosmonaut
Valery Postnikov, former Russian hockey player and coach
Valery Ponomarev, Ukrainian jazz musician
Valery Perevozchenko, Soviet engineer
Valeri Qazaishvili, Georgian international footballer
Valery Rozov, former Russian BASE jumper
Valery Sablin, (1939–1976) Soviet Navy Officer and mutineer
Valery Shary, Belarusian Olympic champion weightlifter
Valery Sigalevitch, Russian pianist
Valeriy Sydorenko, Ukrainian boxer
Valeriy Syutkin, Russian singer
Valery Todorovsky, Russian film director
Valery Wichman, LGBT rights activist from the Cook Islands
Valeri Zolotukhin, Russian actor


== Surname ==
Carl Valeri, Australian footballer
Diego Valeri, Argentine football player
Edmond Valléry Gressier, French lawyer
Franca Valeri, Italian actress
François Valéry, French singer-songwriter and composer
Heike Vallery, German mechanical engineer
Jean Joseph Valéry (1828–1879), French businessman, diplomat and senator.
Paul Valéry, French author


== Fictional characters ==
Valery, a character in The Sopranos played by Vitali Baganov. Valery was a member of the Russian mob and acquainted with Tony Soprano.


== Other ==
Valleri, a song performed by The Monkees


== See also ==
Valerie (given name)
Valerii (name)
Valeriu (given name)
Valerius (name)
Valeria (given name)
Valerian (name)
Valeriano (name)
Valerianus (disambiguation)
Valer (disambiguation)
Valera (disambiguation)
Valérien (disambiguation)
Vale (disambiguation)
Vallery, France
Walric, abbot of Leuconay
Saint-Vaury
All pages with titles beginning with Valery
All pages with titles containing Valery