The Workers' Militia (Hungarian: Munkásőrség) was a paramilitary organization in the Hungarian People's Republic from 1957 to 1989.
The Workers' Militia was formed after the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 as an armed force of the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party (MSZMP) under its direct control and separate from the Hungarian People's Army. It was open to both men and women and reached a peak membership of 60,000 in 1988. The Workers' Militia was controlled by the MSZMP's Central Committee until 1985 and dissolved as a result of the 1989 Hungarian referendum.


== History ==

The concept of "worker-guard" paramilitary organizations had already existed in the Eastern Bloc countries since the end of World War II, partly to circumvent peace treaties that limited the size of their regular armies, and partly to provide more actionable and politically reliable armed force at the disposal of the ruling communist party.
On 18 February 1957, the Soviet-backed Revolutionary Workers'-Peasants' Government led by János Kádár and the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party (MSZMP) ordered the formation of the Workers' Militia with the official aim to defend the means of production, months after the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. It replaced the communist regime's special police force (karhatalom or also known as pufajkások, named after their Soviet-style quilted jackets). It was a voluntary service, open to both men and women, but obviously offered some privileges and career advantages. Workers' Militia units were subordinate to the local police, but membership was handled by MSZMP committees. Personnel wore distinctive slate gray fatigues and "Lenin cap," and armed with spare weapons sourced from the Hungarian People's Army. At first they were given handguns, but they were later armed with Soviet PPSh-41 submachine guns, which they were allowed to keep at home and would be prominently featured on the organisation's insignia. Starting with 20,000 members, it gradually developed into a large armed force, reaching 60,000 in 1988.
The commanders of the organization were:

Lajos Halas (1957–1962)
Árpád Papp (1962–1970)
Sándor Borbély (1970–1989)
The Workers' Militia was never deployed but served as a visible deterrent to opponents of the "soft dictatorship" of Kádár and the MSZMP, both real and perceived. Guards were visible at most public events organised by the state, either providing security for the party or as attendees in large groups. The organisation was largely unpopular with the Hungarian public, and even distrusted by the MSZMP's leadership to the point that its personnel were initially equipped with weapons but no ammunition. Day-to-day activities of the Workers' Militia mainly consisted of civil work such as building flood defences and enforcing cordon sanitaires.
On 8 May 1985, the Central Committee of the MSZMP relinquished its direct control of the Workers' Militia, and on June 15, a Council of Ministers took over the supervision and controla. The Workers' Militia retained its paramilitary focus until the change of the communist regime in Hungary at the end of 1989.


=== Disbandment ===
On 26 November 1989, a referendum was held with the question: "Should the Workers' Militia be disbanded?". The answer was an overwhelming Yes (94.9%), a result which confirmed the previously adopted law (1989 XXXth).


== Ranks ==


=== Staff position markings ===


=== Command position markings ===


== See also ==
Eastern Bloc politics
Similar formations:

People's Militias
Combat Groups of the Working Class
ORMO
Patriotic Guards
Worker-Peasant Red Guards


== References ==