The 2021 Billboard Music Awards were held on May 23, 2021, at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles, California. The ceremony was  broadcast live from NBC, and was hosted by Nick Jonas. Musical performers were announced during a series of social media posts.
Nominees for Top Hot 100 Artist, Top Latin Male Artist, and Top Rap Female Artist were announced on April 28, 2021. The full list of nominations was presented on April 29, 2021. The Weeknd received the most nominations on the ceremony, being nominated for sixteen awards, later going on to win the most awards of the ceremony with 10 awards.
Pink received the Billboard Icon Award, Trae tha Truth received the Change Maker Award, and Drake received the Artist of the Decade Award.


== Background ==
Finalists and select winners of the 2021 Billboard Music Awards were based on Billboard charts and reports from March 21, 2020, to April 3, 2021. There are two fan-voted categories; Top Social Artist, and Top Collaboration. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, no awards were given for any touring category, including Top Touring Artist. The ceremony was sponsored by Rockstar Energy Drink, Security Benefit, Hot Tools, and Xfinity.
Nick Jonas was announced as the host of the ceremony on April 30, 2021. P!nk was announced as the recipient of the Billboard Icon Award and the first confirmed performer on May 4, 2021. She is the youngest recipient of the award to date, and succeeded Garth Brooks, who won the award in 2020. The award was presented by Jon Bon Jovi. Trae tha Truth was announced as the second recipient of the Change Maker Award on May 13, 2021. The award was presented by Tina Knowles-Lawson. In addition, Billboard has partnered with Trae and his non-profit organization, Angels by Nature, to create the awards show's first-ever non-fungible token (NFT). The sales opened up during the weekend of the ceremony, and all proceeds were donated towards the organization.
Although country singer Morgan Wallen earned six nominations this year, Billboard Music Awards producers announced that Wallen was not invited to attend the ceremony, due to a video released earlier this year by TMZ of him using a racial slur while with his friends in Nashville. In a statement, the production company noted, "Since his recent conduct does not align with our core values, we will not be including him on the show in any capacity (performing, presenting, accepting)." The company also stated that Wallen's nominations were solely based on his Billboard charts performance.
Billboard's Top Artists of the 2010s Decade list was officially revealed on May 11, 2021. Drake ranked at number one, and was honored with the Artist of the Decade Award. Taylor Swift, who ranked at number two overall, is the top female artist of the 2010s decade.
Unlike the 2020 ceremony, which had no fans in attendance due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Dick Clark Productions allowed fully vaccinated attendees (meaning they would have had their final vaccine before May 6, 2021) to attend the ceremony. Attendees would be required to show their vaccination card before entering the venue, complete wellness screenings, have their temperature taken, sit in dedicated audience seating, and wear facial coverings at all times. There was an estimated 500–600 fans in attendance.


== Performers ==
On May 10, 2021, performers were announced on a daily basis, leading up to the ceremony, via social media.


== Presenters ==
The full list of presenters was announced on May 21, 2021, via social media.

Nick Jonas – host, introduced Doja Cat & SZA and Twenty One Pilots
Lil Rel Howery – presented Top Hot 100 Artist
Gabrielle Union – presented Top Selling Song
Michelle Obama – introduced Alicia Keys
Renée Elise Goldsberry – presented Top Country Female Artist
Dixie D'Amelio – introduced AJR
Lena Waithe – presented Top Latin Artist
Jon Bon Jovi – presented Pink with the Icon Award
Lil Baby and Nick Jonas – presented Top Hot 100 Song (presented by Rockstar Energy Drink)
Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis – introduced Sounds of Blackness featuring Ann Nesby
Swizz Beatz – presented Top Rap Song
Tina Knowles – presented Trae tha Truth with the Change Maker Award and introduced Padma Lakshmi
Padma Lakshmi – introduced BTS
Drake's friends and family — presented Drake with the Artist of the Decade Award
Chelsea Handler – presenting Top Rock Artist
Kathryn Hahn – introduced Glass Animals
Henry Golding – introduced the Weeknd
Cynthia Erivo – presented Top Billboard 200 Album
Priyanka Chopra – introduced Duran Duran
Leslie Odom Jr. – presented Top Artist
Kelsea Ballerini – introduced the Jonas Brothers and Marshmello


== Winners and nominees ==
Select finalists for the 2021 Billboard Music Awards were announced on April 28, 2021. NBC's Today Show revealed the finalists for Top Hot 100 Artist live in the Pop Start segment. E!'s Daily Pop announced the finalists for Top Latin Male Artist live during their show. Access Hollywood announced the finalists for Top Rap Female Artist live during their show.
Finalists in all categories were announced during the first-ever Billboard Music Awards - The List Live, which was streamed on social media platforms on April 29, 2021. The show was hosted by Access Hollywood's Zuri Hall and comedian LaLa Milan. Finalists were presented by Finneas, Maggie Baird, Luis Fonsi, Jon Batiste, Tate McRae, Anitta, Bretman Rock, Brianne Howey, Antonia Gentry, Chris Sullivan, Jay Pharoah, Kandi Burruss, Kyle Richards, Leslie Jordan, Lisa Rinna, the New Voices Bay Area TIGQ Chorus, Nick DiGiovanni, Paris Hilton, Rob Gronkowski, Tanya Rad, Brad Goreski, Tika the Iggy, Tim Anderson, and Wisdom Kaye. The show also featured reactions from 24kGoldn, Gabby Barrett, and Seventeen. In addition, Hall and Milan discussed the award categories, key finalist chart achievements and records.
Voting for Top Social Artist and Top Collaboration opened on Billboard's official website and on social media on May 10, 2021, and closed on May 21, 2021, at 11:59 p.m. PST.
On the day of the ceremony, Love Island narrator and co-writer Matthew Hoffman hosted an Instagram live on the ceremonies' official account at 10 a.m. PST, where he will announce the winners in categories that will not be aired during the main show.
Winners are listed first and in bold.


== References ==