Nicholas Joseph Fuentes (born August 18, 1998) is an American political commentator and a far-right white nationalist, activist, and live streamer. He hosts America First, a livestream promoting Christian nationalism, white supremacy, misogyny, anti-LGBTQ views, and antisemitism including Holocaust denial. His supporters are known as Groypers. 
Fuentes was raised in La Grange Park, Illinois, and attended Lyons Township High School where he was described as having held mainstream conservative views. He began political activism in 2016 after graduating, and started the episodic live stream America First in 2017. In 2019, Fuentes's followers began to heckle Charlie Kirk and events at his organization Turning Point USA, referred to as the "Groyper War". In 2020, seeking to establish a white supremacist conference to rival the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), Fuentes began holding an annual America First Political Action Conference (AFPAC).
In November 2022, Fuentes and Kanye West had a private dinner with Donald Trump. The meeting was condemned by some American political commentators due to Fuentes and West's antisemitism. In August 2024, Fuentes launched the "Groyper War 2" against Trump's presidential campaign. Memes, trolling, and protests were used to push for more extreme right-wing positions. In 2025, Fuentes said Trump was a "scam artist" for his failure to release the Jeffrey Epstein client list, and the New York Times and The Atlantic highlighted his growing influence on the political right.
Fuentes has been involved in a number of controversial events. He attended the 2017 Unite the Right rally, and spoke at events preceding the January 6 United States Capitol attack. Fuentes faced widespread deplatforming from major social media, streaming, and financial services between 2020 and 2023, primarily for violating hate speech policies and involvement with January 6. In November 2024, after his home was doxed, he was arrested for battery for pepper-spraying and pushing an activist at his front door. In December 2024, an armed man arrived at Fuentes home after killing three people, with the 24-year-old suspect killed by police during a shootout.


== Early life and family ==
Nicholas Joseph Fuentes was born on August 18, 1998, to William and Lauren (née Chicco). He has a twin sister, Melissa. According to Fuentes, he is of Italian, Irish and Mexican descent. His father is half Mexican. He grew up in La Grange Park, Illinois. He attended Lyons Township High School, where he was president of the student council. He was raised Catholic. Fuentes began commentating on politics through a local radio and TV station hosted by his high school, where he was described as holding mainstream conservative views. John Keilman wrote in the Chicago Tribune that "after his graduation in 2016, he embraced the extreme right".
He studied international relations and politics during his freshman year at Boston University, but dropped out in connection with his attendance at the Unite the Right rally, a 2017 white supremacist rally in Charlottesville, Virginia. He said afterwards he neither supported Nazism nor the man who drove into the crowd, but believed the violence from counter-protesters spurred violence in return. Fuentes, though proud to have attended the event, ultimately dropped out of Boston University after receiving death threats over his media persona, statements, and attendance of the rally. A former mentor of his stated that the response to his involvement with Unite the Right helped raise his media presence.
Fuentes dropped out in 2017 after completing his freshman year. At this time, Fuentes faced pressure from his parents to pursue a more conventional path, such as getting a job or returning to college. Fuentes told Louis Theroux of the proposal he made to his parents at that time: "'Why don't you give me just one year to explore this. If it works out, I'll keep doing it. If it doesn't work out, I'll abandon it.' ... And it worked out."


== Live streaming and interviews ==
Fuentes began hosting the episodic live stream America First with Nicholas J. Fuentes, in 2017 during his freshman year at Boston University. America First is characterized by Fuentes's frequent use of jokes and irony to appeal to Generation Z while providing plausible deniability for his often extreme views. He denounced multiculturalism and stated that the white identity had been marginalized. However, he said he was not racist, and supported nonviolence. During a show in April 2017, Fuentes "argued the First Amendment was not written for Muslims or immigrants". He further stated "Who runs the media? Globalists. Time to kill the globalists" and "I want people that run CNN to be arrested and deported or hanged because this is deliberate." Following these and other comments, as well as publicity over his attendance at the Unite the Right rally, he left Right Side Broadcasting Network in August 2017. At the time, Seales remarked: "RSBN prides itself in our diversity, as we are a company loaded with folks from all different backgrounds. Nick was just taking things a little too far into right field for us." One episode consisted of a monologue in which he implied he questions the death toll of six million Jews in the Holocaust. Fuentes later disputed that he had ever denied the Holocaust, calling his monologue a "lampoon". NPR cited this as an example of Fuentes's use of irony to avoid consequences for his words, citing a 2020 video where Fuentes said, "Irony is so important for giving a lot of cover and plausible deniability for our views", specifically regarding Holocaust denial.
Fuentes initially live-streamed from the basement of his parents' home, which was considered central to his public persona as a NEET (not in employment, education, or training) or a disconnected youth. He relocated his livestreaming operations from his parents' basement to an apartment in Berwyn, Illinois, in November 2020. Despite telling viewers he was still working from his parents' home, police records and neighbor accounts suggest he operated from the Berwyn property. His father frequently oversaw renovations at the complex, particularly on the second floor, where Fuentes established a new podcasting studio.
He co-hosted the Nationalist Review podcast with another white nationalist, James Allsup, until January 2018. The Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) noted in a report, "the two [Allsup and Fuentes] had a public falling out with each host accusing the other of laziness, impropriety and a variety of petty slights". Fuentes spoke at the American Renaissance conference in April 2018. Fuentes collaborated with Alex Jones to launch his own live-streaming platform, Cozy.tv, in October 2021.
Since late 2024, Fuentes has experienced a significant increase in visibility and influence within the American right. Fuentes has appeared on several other podcasts and streams, amassing millions of views on YouTube, Rumble, and Kick. He has primarily appeared on podcast episodes with Myron Gaines, a fellow right-wing conspiracy theorist, appearing on his Fresh & Fit episodes alongside his co-host Walter Weekes, as well as on debates and discussions hosted by streamer Adin Ross. He is also a regular guest on Alex Jones' show, Infowars. As Fuentes's influence continued to rise in 2025, he also began to appear on more mainstream podcasts, such as Patrick Bet-David's PBD Podcast, Bradley Martyn's Raw Talk, and the Nelk Boys' Kick stream.
In late October 2025, Tucker Carlson interviewed Fuentes on The Tucker Carlson Show. At the beginning of the interview, Carlson stated: "Everybody's going to be like, 'You're a Nazi, you just like Fuentes. But then I'm like, 'I don't think Fuentes is going away. Ben Shapiro tried to strangle him in the crib in college, and now he's bigger than ever.'" The interview prompted some condemnation from Republicans, conservative commentators, and Jewish organizations, who criticized Carlson for providing Fuentes a platform. Heritage Foundation President Kevin Roberts stated that a "venomous coalition" would not be able to cancel Carlson. Roberts also argued that silencing Fuentes was not the solution. Roberts' remarks resulted in internal backlash at Heritage, some employees stated "Fuentes is not someone with ideas worthy of debate". On October 31, Roberts clarified that Fuentes "is fomenting Jew hatred, and his incitements are not only immoral and un-Christian, they risk violence". Heritage announced staff reassignments after the interview. Ali Breland in The Atlantic stated the interview indicated Fuentes's views had grown more mainstream among some Make America Great Again (MAGA) supporters. He cited the reluctance of figures like Carlson to fully distance themselves from such rhetoric. The controversy exposed a broader conflict amongst conservatives over antisemitism.


== Groyper War ==
By 2019, America First had attracted a cult following, who refer to themselves as "Groypers". The movement consists of primarily young, online activists with alt-right views. Fuentes has organized the Groypers to challenge mainstream conservative figures, notably during the 2019 "Groyper Wars", where they disrupted events hosted by TPUSA and others with provocative questions on immigration, Israel, and cultural issues. Fuentes had repeatedly criticized TPUSA and its founder, Charlie Kirk, accusing them of betraying Donald Trump by advocating in favor of mass legal immigration, support for foreign aid for Israel, and queer issues.
Throughout October and November 2019, his supporters were present at many of Kirk's public speaking events, which featured guest speakers including Donald Trump Jr., Lara Trump, and Kimberly Guilfoyle. According to Mother Jones, These campaigns frequently involved asking questions that prompted viewers to look up far-right and antisemitic conspiracy theories and hoaxes online. Fuentes characterized the campaign as a grassroots effort to expose TPUSA as ideologically inconsistent with the ideology espoused by Donald Trump and other right-wing populists. As a result of this campaign, some right-wing mainstream politicians and pundits disavowed Fuentes, characterizing his beliefs as extreme and out of touch with mainstream conservatism. At a book release event, Groypers shouted down Donald Trump Jr until he ended the event early. In December 2019, Fuentes confronted conservative political commentator Ben Shapiro outside a TPUSA event in West Palm Beach, Florida. Shapiro was walking with his wife and young children when Fuentes asked why he had delivered a speech at Stanford University criticizing him.


== Involvement in the January 6 Capitol attack ==

Fuentes was among the far-right individuals and groups who participated in the rallies that led up to the January 6 United States Capitol attack. At a pro-Trump protest in Washington, D.C., in December 2020, Fuentes led a crowd to chant "Destroy the GOP" and encouraged them to sit out the United States Senate special runoff election in Georgia. In February 2021, a video of his speech was played during the second impeachment trial of Donald Trump by the House delegate Stacey Plaskett.
Fuentes was among a group of far-right activists and groups who received large donations from a French man on December 8, 2020. Fuentes received the largest share which was approximately $250,000 worth of Bitcoin. The donor also posted an apparent suicide note, according to Chainalysis. The donor's status has not yet been confirmed. The FBI began an investigation as to whether any of this money went toward the financing of illegal acts, such as the storming of the U.S. Capitol. Fuentes was not charged with any crimes.
On December 12, 2020, at a rally the day after the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear Texas v. Pennsylvania, Fuentes spoke to a crowd of supporters at Freedom Plaza, stating, "It is us and our ancestors that created everything good that you see in this country. All these people that have taken over our country—we do not need them. ... It is the American people, and our leader, Donald Trump, against everybody else in this country and this world... Our Founding Fathers would get in the streets, and they would take this country back by force if necessary. And that is what we must be prepared to do."
On January 4, 2021, Fuentes discussed killing state legislators who were unwilling to overturn the results of the 2020 election, saying, "What can you and I do to a state legislator—besides kill them? We should not do that. I'm not advising that, but I mean, what else can you do, right?"
According to several media outlets, Fuentes was part of the mob that attacked the Capitol. The Southern Poverty Law Center reported that Fuentes was "visible in both livestreams and images amidst a mob of pro-Trump insurrectionists...wearing what appears to be a VIP badge". Although he did not enter the building, he allegedly shouted encouragement for the rioters to "Keep moving towards the Capitol – it appears we are taking the Capitol back! ... Break down the barriers and disregard the police. The Capitol belongs to us!"
The FBI opened an investigation in Fuentes's conduct which was closed, after five months, without any charges. On January 19, 2022, the United States House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack issued a subpoena to Fuentes.


== Deplatforming ==
Fuentes has been banned from numerous social media platforms, financial services, and e-commerce providers since 2020, with most actions attributed to violations of policies on hate speech and related content. In January 2020, Fuentes was the most-viewed live streamer on the DLive platform. Following the January 6 United States Capitol attack, his DLive channel was permanently suspended. Fuentes's YouTube channel was also demonetized, and one of his videos was removed by YouTube as a violation of their hate speech policies. Fuentes had previously been banned from Twitch and from Reddit. On February 14, 2020, his YouTube channel was terminated for violating policies on hate speech. Twitter was among the last mainstream social media sites to ban Fuentes, indefinitely suspending his verified account in July 2021. He has also been banned from financial and e-commerce services, including PayPal, Venmo, Patreon, Shopify, Stripe, Streamlabs, and Coinbase. According to ABC News in March 2021, Fuentes had been suspended from "almost all" social media platforms. Fuentes claimed that his bank account had been frozen, that he had been placed on a federal no-fly list, and that he had been banned from Airbnb, Facebook, and Instagram. Fuentes described these actions as "overt political persecution". In December 2021, the social media platform Gettr permanently suspended Fuentes. The site received backlash from Fuentes's fanbase as well as from the Arizona State Senator Wendy Rogers. Gettr subsequently banned use of the word groyper on the platform.


=== Reinstatements ===
On January 25, 2023, his verified Twitter account was briefly reinstated. According to a senior researcher at the SPLC, he immediately praised Adolf Hitler and the Unabomber and declared, "Jews run the news". Twitter banned him again the next day. In May 2024, following an announcement by Elon Musk, Fuentes's X (formerly Twitter) account was reinstated. Musk stated, "I cannot claim to be a defender of free speech, but then permanently ban someone who hasn't violated the law, no matter how much I disagree with what they say." The ADL condemned Musk's decision, to which Musk addressed the backlash by stating, "It is better to have anti whatever out in the open to be rebutted than to grow simmering in the darkness." Since his return to X, Fuentes has grown his follower base to over 1,000,000. After Fuentes's bans from DLive and YouTube, America First moved to streaming on Rumble with approximately 500,000 viewers. This growth in popularity led to exchanges with Tucker Carlson and Jason Whitlock in which they recognized his ability to draw an audience.
Fuentes and Alex Jones attempted to rejoin YouTube in September 2025 after the platform announced it would be offering the reinstatement of all channels banned from the site due to political speech violations. However, YouTube again banned both Fuentes and Jones hours after creating new channels.


== America First Political Action Conference ==

The America First Political Action Conference (AFPAC) is an annual white nationalist and far-right political conference founded by Nick Fuentes. The Arizona Republic characterized it as an extremist rival to the Conservative Political Action Conference. Michelle Malkin spoke at the first and second AFPAC in February 2020 and 2021 respectively. In November 2019, Malkin was fired by the Young America's Foundation after 17 years of employment over her support for Fuentes. Steve King and Paul Gosar also presented at the second AFPAC.
Fuentes was barred from the Hyatt Regency Orlando, in February 2021, where he attempted to "start a commotion" during the CPAC. Newsweek reported that he was again removed from CPAC in July 2021 for harassing a journalist.
Fuentes hosted his third annual AFPAC event in February 2022. Marjorie Taylor Greene, the U.S. representative for Georgia's 14th district, attended the conference, while Janice McGeachin, then the lieutenant governor of Idaho, and Gosar prerecorded videos that were played at the event. Greene's attendance was criticized by other Republican Party politicians such as Mitt Romney. Greene later said that she did not know who the organizers of the conference were. The event highlighted Alexander Dugin's growing influence on the American far-right. He blamed gay-rights, liberal values, and separation of church and state for societal decline. AFPAC IV was cancelled by the venue, but they held an alternative event, also attended by Sulaiman Ahmed, an online anti-Israel commentator, and David Duke, who is formerly of the Ku Klux Klan.


== Relationship with Donald Trump ==
According to the Anti-Defamation League, Fuentes cited the candidacy and presidency of Donald Trump as an inspiration for America First. America First is broadly considered an American foreign policy of nationalism and protectionism.


=== Dinner at Mar-a-Lago ===

On November 22, 2022, Donald Trump hosted Fuentes and Kanye West for a dinner at Trump's Mar-a-Lago residence in Florida. The meeting was at West's request. West said that Trump was "really impressed with Nick Fuentes". Trump released a statement saying that after contacting him earlier in the week to arrange the visit, West "unexpectedly showed up with three of his friends, whom I knew nothing about", with whom Trump dined, and that "the dinner was quick and uneventful".
Trump further elaborated several days later that he met with West to "help a seriously troubled man, who just happens to be black... who has been decimated in his business and virtually everything else". Trump also acknowledged advising West to drop out of the race.

Members of the meeting gave contradictory accounts of what occurred. According to Axios:...a source stated that Trump "seemed very taken" by Fuentes and "impressed that the 24-year-old was able to rattle off statistics and recall speeches dating back to his 2016 campaign."
Paraphrasing the conversation, the source said Fuentes told the president he preferred him to be "authentic", and that Trump seemed scripted and unlike himself during his recent 2024 campaign announcement speech. Trump responded, "You like it better when I just speak off the cuff", the source said. Fuentes replied that he did, calling Trump an "amazing" president when he was unrestrained. "There was a lot of fawning back and forth", the source added.
West also stated that after asking Trump to be his vice-presidential candidate, Trump "started basically screaming at me at the table telling me I was going to lose—I mean has that ever worked for anyone in history. I'm like hold on, hold on, hold on, Trump, you're talking to Ye."
The meeting received significant attention and comment from domestic and international political figures. The nature of the event—in which a former president hosted guests with open antisemitic beliefs—was considered "unprecedented" in the modern era and garnered intense bipartisan criticism of Trump, with Republican leaders in the U.S. Congress making a rare rebuke of Trump. The scandal raised questions over Trump's tenability as a candidate in the 2024 election. Among American Jews, the ensuing discussion was described by a New York Times writer as "what may be the most discomfiting moment in U.S. history in a half-century or more". Commentators and politicians argued Trump's failure to condemn antisemitism and racism from the guests was an implicit acceptance of their beliefs.
Trump defended the dinner in a Truth Social post, writing about West: "we got along great, he expressed no anti-Semitism, & I appreciated all of the nice things he said about me on 'Tucker Carlson'" and "why wouldn't I agree to meet?", and that he "never met and knew nothing about" Fuentes. According to The Washington Post, Trump initially believed that the events of the evening would "blow over". However, by December 1, the actions of West and Fuentes after the dinner had changed his mind.
Mike Pence, the former U.S. vice president who served during Trump's first presidency, stated: "I think he should apologize for it, and he should denounce those individuals and their hateful rhetoric without qualification." Israeli prime minister-designate Benjamin Netanyahu labeled the meeting a "mistake". In a follow-up interview, Netanyahu stated: "...on Kanye West and that other unacceptable guest [Nick Fuentes], I think it's not merely unacceptable, it's just wrong. And I hope he sees his way to staying out of it and condemning it."
Three years later, on November 16, 2025, Trump said of Tucker Carlson's interview with Fuentes the previous month: "You can’t tell him who to interview. If he wants to interview Nick Fuentes — I don’t know much about him, but if he wants to do it — get the word out. People have to decide."


=== Groyper War 2 and disillusionment with Trump ===
In August 2024, Fuentes began a "digital war" against Trump's presidential campaign, which he dubbed "Groyper War 2". In addition to directing his followers to make their demands trend on X and Truth Social, Fuentes threatened to "escalate pressure in the real world", urging followers to withhold their votes and protest Trump rallies in battleground states. Fuentes said Vance was "the end state of Trumpism, a complete fabrication who was created in a lab by Peter Thiel".
Shortly after initiating this effort, Fuentes took credit for Trump's rehiring of Corey Lewandowski as a senior campaign advisor in August, although Lewandowski was ultimately told to focus on staying in the role of a surrogate for the campaign in October after reportedly losing a power struggle regarding Trump's campaign. Fuentes said he would not vote for Trump and his running mate, JD Vance. He questioned whether Vance would "support white identity", since Vance's wife is of Indian heritage. Vance said Fuentes was a "total loser" in response, and indicated the Trump campaign would not listen to him. Conservatives largely agreed that he had little influence on Trump himself, which Fuentes agreed with.
In November 2024, Fuentes criticized Trump supporters for dressing in garbage bags after a rally where Donald Trump climbed into a garbage truck in response to President Joe Biden's remarks about his followers. He described this as a moment of realization that "Trumpism was a cult", illustrating the "slavish devotion" of its supporters, who would "just eat up anything". He stated, "That was the moment when I realized it has gone too far, it is Frankenstein's monster, we've created a golem", and characterized Trumpism as "a giant cult-like scam".
In July 2025, Fuentes criticized Trump after he refused to release the Epstein files, describing Trump as a "scam artist". Fuentes repudiated supporters that had called for their release, before stating that the "liberals were right", and that "when we look back on the history of populism in America, we are going to look back on the MAGA movement as the biggest scam in history".


== Relationship with Kanye West ==


=== Involvement with 2024 presidential campaign ===

In late 2022, Fuentes shifted away from his longtime position of supporting Donald Trump and instead began promoting Kanye West's presidential campaign. and far-right streamer Sneako.
On November 28, 2022, political commentator Tim Pool interviewed West, Fuentes, and Yiannopoulos regarding West's campaign. Pool pressed West and Fuentes with an article posted by Mike Pence stating that Trump was wrong for allowing anti-Semitic people to eat with him at dinner, referencing the two's dinner with Trump 6 days earlier, and demanded that the two apologize. they refused to do this, and eventually walked off during the interview. In a December interview with Alex Jones, the two garnered significant controversy after West declared that he "loves" Adolf Hitler and denies the Holocaust. Fuentes, while not directly commenting on West's remarks, shared his agreement with West's views throughout the interview. On December 5, 2022, Proud Boys founder Gavin McInnes interviewed West alongside Fuentes, with the duo asserting that Hitler's reputation was "crafted by Jews". West also endorsed Fuentes's beliefs by stating that society needed to be structured around a Christian government, and that media in the United States needed to be controlled by Christians.
Following controversies regarding Fuentes's supposed involvement in allegations based around another Kanye supporter, Ali Alexander, West fired Fuentes and Alexander from his campaign with the help of Yiannopoulos, who had been rehired after initially leaving Ye's team following his comments in the Jones and McInnes interviews.


=== 2025 reunion ===
Upon West's release of the controversial song "Heil Hitler", which Fuentes witnessed the production of during a Kick stream hosted by Sneako and producer Digital Nas in April, he stated that the song would become the "song of the summer", before remarking, "Imagine 50,000 people in a stadium on their feet singing every word. This is where it's going."


== Political views ==
On an edition of America First, streamed on Rumble on 28 March 2025, Fuentes explained:

"Jews are running society, women need to shut the fuck up, Blacks need to be imprisoned for the most part, and we would live in paradise ... White men need to run the household, they need to run the country, they need to run the companies. They just need to run everything, it's that simple. It's literally that simple."
This was described as a helpful distillation of his ideology by New York Times columnist Michelle Goldberg.


=== White nationalism ===
Fuentes espouses alt-right, white nationalist, and anti-immigration views that emphasize racial and religious identity, opposition to multiculturalism, and criticism of mainstream conservatism. Fuentes calls himself a "reactionary", stating that he wants to turn the Republican Party into "a truly reactionary party". The SPLC and ADL say he hopes to have the alt-right displace conservatism and the GOP, and has criticized mainstream conservative groups, stating that "Christian Republican voters get screwed over" because "the GOP is run by Jews, atheists, and homosexuals". In June, Tess Owen, a reporter for Vice, wrote that Fuentes "has positioned himself as the kingpin of the ultranationalist youth movement".
Fuentes has spoken positively of "a tidal wave of white identity" following his attendance at the 2017 Charlottesville Unite the Right rally and sees America's "white demographic core" as central to the country's identity. Fuentes has discussed the white genocide conspiracy theory. He said the term white supremacist is an "anti-white slur". Fuentes wants the United States to be a white, Christian country and has specified that it is not a "Judeo-Christian" country, according to the SPLC.
He has also described Chicago as "nigger hell".


=== Christian nationalism ===

Fuentes identifies with the traditionalist Catholic movement. Fuentes is also an integralist and a Christian nationalist. He has said, "You're either a Catholic or you're with the Jews", and he has voiced support for a Catholic government and Catholic media. Fuentes supports a Christian theocracy instead of what he calls a "Jewish-occupied government". Fuentes has described himself as a reactionary who supports autocracy, Catholic monarchy, just war, the Crusades, and the Inquisition. Fuentes opposes democracy.


=== Antisemitism ===
Fuentes holds antisemitic views and denies the Holocaust. He has praised Adolf Hitler, stating "Hitler is awesome. Hitler was right. And the Holocaust didn’t happen.” on his show America First.
He has promoted antisemitic conspiracy theories against Jews and called for a "holy war" against them. He said that "Jews stood in the way" of overturning Roe v. Wade, and that the Dobbs decision meant that "banning gay marriage is back on the menu, banning sodomy is back on the menu, banning contraceptives is back on the menu, and basically we're having something like Taliban rule in America, in a good way". During his speech at AFPAC 2022, Fuentes bestowed "giggling praise" on Hitler. In 2025, Fuentes claimed that his antisemitic views had toned down as he aged, though the New York Times stated that "A review of Mr. Fuentes's recent remarks indicates otherwise."


=== Dictatorship and monarchy ===
According to The American Conservative, Fuentes has advocated for implementing a Catholic monarchy or dictatorship in the United States. He has praised the leadership of dictators, including Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin.


=== Islam ===
Fuentes has described Islam as "a barbaric ideology that [wants] to come over and kill us". During a show in April 2017, Fuentes "argued the First Amendment was not written for Muslims or immigrants". Fuentes has expressed support for the Taliban leadership within Afghanistan.


=== Foreign policy and support for authoritarian regimes ===
Fuentes's foreign policy views praise authoritarian regimes and movements that oppose U.S. influence. On March 10, 2022, Fuentes praised "czar Putin" for the Russian invasion of Ukraine, which he claimed was to "liberate Ukraine from the Great Satan and from the evil empire in the world, which is the United States". The AFPAC event in 2022, led by Fuentes, was marked by support for Russia's invasion of Ukraine. One expert on the far-right stated, "the common thread is this idea that because of western European and US influence on Ukraine, Ukraine was a place where the same perceived downfalls of western society existed". During his speech, Fuentes praised Hitler, and said that the media had been comparing Vladimir Putin to Hitler "as if that wasn't a good thing". Fuentes also asked the audience, "Can we get a round of applause for Russia?" which was followed by roaring applause and chants of "Putin! Putin!" After the conference, Fuentes led a prayer for Russia's forces in Ukraine. He also ridiculed Kamala Harris for claiming that Russia was committing war crimes. Fuentes spread lies about death counts and Russia's motivations for the war.
Fuentes has expressed support for Chinese unification, saying in 2022, "I want China to take back Taiwan, I want Russia to take back Ukraine, if for no other reason than it's time for America to be humiliated."
Fuentes has praised the conservative religious aspect of Islamist Taliban governance. He has been described as having "disdain" for Muslims, but he states that his goal is "Catholic Taliban rule" in the United States. After the Afghan government fell to the Taliban while American forces were withdrawing in August 2021, Fuentes posted on the Telegram messaging service, "The Taliban is a conservative, religious force, the US is godless and liberal. The defeat of the US government in Afghanistan is unequivocally a positive development."
Fuentes is a vocal critic of Israel and U.S. support for the country. He stated that the United States should withdraw support for Israel because, "We're European, they're ethnically Jewish". He claimed that the October 7 attacks were staged to "justify Israel's unfolding war to destroy Iran and its proxies".
In October 2025, Fuentes qualified his isolationism by endorsing the enforcement of U.S. dominance over Latin America, stating, "We are in a great power competition with China and Russia". He also expressed support for threatening Venezuela, citing the country's resources as justification and saying that the United States needed to "take their stuff", but did not support regime change.


=== COVID-19 conspiracy theories ===
Fuentes has frequently spread conspiracy theories and misinformation surrounding the FDA-approved COVID-19 vaccines. In December 2020, Fuentes reportedly had an altercation on a flight over mask mandates. In April 2021, Salon reported that "Nicholas Fuentes and his 'groyper army' have joined forces with the coronavirus anti-vaccine community." That year, he embarked on an anti-vaccine speaking tour, where he promoted hoaxes about COVID-19 vaccines.


=== Opposition to JD Vance ===
According to the New York Times, Fuentes "is determined to thwart the presidential ambitions of Vice President JD Vance". He has described Vance as a "a complete fabrication who was created in a lab by Peter Thiel". He has criticized Vance for having a mixed race family, stating "you can't make me go and vote for some fat ass with some mixed-race family".


=== Women and abortion ===
In 2022, Fuentes told the British journalist Louis Theroux that he believes it would be better if women did not have the right to vote. In November 2025, Fuentes said that if he was elected president, he would “just take away the right to vote for tons of people. Women for sure.” In July 2023, appearing on the Fresh and Fit Podcast, Fuentes stated that women were "baby machines" because "that's what their brains are about". He has stated that the optimal age for a wife is 16, which he states is "right when the milk is good". Fuentes also has stated that rape is "not so a big deal" and has claimed that "a lot of women want to be raped". Fuentes believes that women should serve a "subordinate" role to their husbands. Following the Dobbs v. Jackson decision that overturned Roe v. Wade in June 2022, Fuentes praised the Supreme Court of the United States for its decision. In November 2024, after Donald Trump's victory in the 2024 U.S. presidential election, Fuentes mocked supporters of abortion, tweeting, "Your body, my choice. Forever" (a brash spin on the freedom of choice slogan "My body, my choice"). The phrase became popular on TikTok, where female users reported that accounts were commenting "your body, my choice" en masse on their posts. On November 8, the Institute for Strategic Dialogue published a report detailing the exponential increase of the phrase's usage on X (formerly Twitter), TikTok, Facebook, and Reddit on the day after the 2024 elections. They also noted instances of its usage offline, specifically on high school and college campuses.


=== LGBT ===
Fuentes has said there is an "LGBT agenda", and has described transgender people and same-sex marriage as "deviancy".


== Legal issues and controversies ==


=== Battery arrest ===
On November 10, 2024, Marla Rose, an activist, approached Fuentes's home and attempted to ring his doorbell. Fuentes allegedly pepper-sprayed Rose before pushing her down his front steps and taking her phone, which she was using to film the interaction. Following this incident, Fuentes was arrested on November 27 and charged with battery; he appeared in court on December 19.


=== Ali Alexander underage sexual misconduct allegations ===

In 2023, Fuentes and associates were involved in a scandal about Fuentes's friend, Ali Alexander. Two accusers, seventeen and fifteen years old, respectively, stated Alexander asked for pornographic images and encouraged sexual intercourse. One accuser said he believed Fuentes was "100 percent aware" of the alleged situation, yet did not intervene at the time. The other accuser said "Nick personally asked me to apologize to Ali for supposedly faking the messages." Fuentes denied the allegations. U.S. Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene requested an FBI investigation, stating, "This is disgusting textbook predation of underage boys. And Nick Fuentes was in on it." Yiannopoulos, a "one-time Alexander ally", alleged he sent a text to Fuentes in January 2022, which read, "Alexander wants to come to your events to have sex with underage boys. Snap out of it."
Alexander later apologized. He also said he was targeted by "fake accusers or literal honey pots eager to frame me", and that some of the claims were "defamatory and false". He further stated "nothing unlawful has occurred".


== Influence ==
As of November 2025, following his interview with Tucker Carlson, there is "a widespread sense" that Fuentes's politics are on the rise, according to New York Times columnist Michelle Goldberg. Conservative writer Rod Dreher, quoting "someone in a position to know", states that "something like" 30-40% of staffers under the age of 30, working for Republican Party officials or institutions in Washington DC are Groypers. Political commentator John Ganz also agrees that there is a "marked" generation gap in the conservative movement, with the older members' horror of the holocaust, support for Christian Zionism and Dispensationalism, and taboos against anti-semitism fading or gone among younger staff members who are "much more open to Fuentes's ideas" that saturate Internet forums and online spaces. 
Conservative opponents of the movement such as the Washington Examiner newspaper have complained that "The Groypers are at the gate", while Fuentes himself has celebrated his success, claiming that "the Groypers have broken through the walls".


== Media coverage ==
In 2022, BBC Two produced a docuseries episode by Louis Theroux, Forbidden America: Extreme and Online, in which Fuentes is prominently featured as part of an exploration of the American far-right online subculture.


== Personal life ==
Fuentes has described himself as a "proud incel" (involuntary celibate). He has expressed interest in marrying a 16-year-old girl, describing this age as "right when the milk is good".
Fuentes has said that "the only really straight heterosexual position is to be an asexual incel", as "having sex with women is gay".


=== Doxing and apparent assassination attempt ===

In November 2024, the address of Fuentes's Berwyn, Illinois, home was doxed on Twitter in response to Fuentes mocking abortion advocates in his tweet "Your body, my choice".
On December 18, 2024, at 11:30 P.M. (CST), a man armed with a pistol and a crossbow showed up at his home. The man, identified as 24-year-old John Lyons of Westchester, was suspected of killing a mother and her two adult children in Mahomet earlier in the day. After police arrived, Lyons fled, forcing his way into Fuentes's neighbor's residence, where he killed two dogs. Lyons then fled into a backyard, where he refused police commands and exchanged gunfire with them before being fatally shot. Fuentes made a statement on his X account, writing, "Last night an armed killer made an attempt on my life at my home, which was recently doxed on this platform". He also wrote, "The gunman carried a pistol, crossbow, and incendiary devices. I believe he intended to kill me. He is now dead. I am okay!"


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Rumble
Nick Fuentes on Twitter