Orange County is a county located in the central part of the U.S. state of Florida. As of the 2020 census, the county had a population of 1,429,908, making it the fifth-most populous county in Florida and the 28th-most populous county in the United States. Its county seat is Orlando, which, along with it being the county's largest city, is the core of the Orlando metropolitan area, which had a population of 2.67 million in 2020.
As of 2022, Orange County has a gross domestic product of $115 billion, the third-largest GDP of Florida's 67 counties and the 27th-largest for the nation's 3,033 counties. The county is a tourist, economic, and cultural hub for the Central Florida region. Popular destinations within the county include Walt Disney World, Universal Orlando, SeaWorld Orlando, Icon Park, Kia Center, Dr. Phillips Center for the Performing Arts, Orlando Museum of Art, and many other attractions. It is the home to the University of Central Florida (UCF), which as of Fall 2023 had a student population of 69,320, making it the fourth-largest on-campus student body of any public university in the United States. The county is home to other notable colleges, including Rollins College and Valencia College. Despite rapid development countywide, swaths of nature still do exist. There are many lakes within the county, most notable of such being Lake Apopka. Wekiwa Springs is a 7,000-acre (28 km2) state park, that features natural springs, trails, and campsites.


== History ==

The land that is Orange County was part of the first land to come up from below the Early Oligocene sea 33.9–28.4 million years ago and is known as Orange Island. Orange County's Rock Spring location is a Pleistocene fossil-bearing area and has yielded a vast variety of birds and mammals including giant sloth, mammoth, camel, and the dire wolf dating around 1.1 million years ago.


=== 19th century to mid-20th century ===

Immediately following the transfer of Florida from the Spanish to the United States in 1821, Governor Andrew Jackson created two counties: Escambia to the west of the Suwannee River and St. Johns to the east. In 1824, the area to the south of St. Johns County was organized as Mosquito County, and Enterprise was named its county seat. This large county took up much of central Florida. The Indian Removal Act of 1830 authorized relocation of the Seminole people from Florida to Oklahoma; this resulted in pushback from the Seminole community, leading to the Second Seminole War. In 1842, a bill was passed in the Florida Territorial Council to rename Mosquito County to Leigh Read County, however, this renaming never took place. Two years later, in 1844, residents of Mosquito County petitioned the Territorial Council to rename the county Harrison County, in honor of President William Henry Harrison, who had only served 31 days in office before dying of Pneumonia. The petition was started in response to county residents finding the name unappealing. In 1845 when Florida finally became a state, the county was renamed Orange County. After the population increased in the region, the legislature organized several counties, such as Osceola (1887), Seminole (1913), Lake  (1887), and Volusia (1854), from its territory.

Early on, the county greatly suffered, due to the Union blockade, but things greatly improved during Reconstruction. A boom in population, resulting from the incorporation of the Town of Orlando in 1875, greatly changed the demographics of the county. Orlando, establishing itself as a city in 1885, experienced rapid growth from 1875 to 1895, due to it becoming the hub of Florida's citrus industry. The fruit that constituted the county's main commodity crop, was the impetus to the aforementioned county's renaming. The dark-green foliage of orange trees filled the county, as did the scent of the orange blossoms when in bloom. Fewer commercial orange groves remained by the end of the twentieth century. The majority of groves were destroyed by the freezing temperatures that occurred in December 1983, January 1985, and December 1989, the worst since 1899.

During the post-Reconstruction period, white people committed a high rate of racial violence against black people in Orange County; racial terrorism was used to re-establish and maintain white supremacy. Whites lynched 33 African Americans here from 1877 to 1950; most were killed in the decades around the turn of the 20th century. This was the highest total of any county in the state, and sixth highest of any county in the country. Florida had the highest per-capita rate of lynchings of any state in the South, where the great majority of these extrajudicial murders took place.
Among the terrorist lynchings was the death of Julius "July" Perry of Ocoee, whose body was found November 3, 1920, hanged from a lightpole in Orlando, near the house of a judge known to be sympathetic to black voting. But this was part of a much larger story of KKK and other white attempts to suppress black voting in Ocoee and the state. African Americans had organized for a year to increase voter turnout for the 1920 presidential election, with organizations helping prepare residents for voter registration, paying for poll taxes, and similar actions. On Election Day in Ocoee, blacks were turned away from the polls. Perry, a prosperous farmer, was suspected of sheltering Mose Norman, an African-American man who had tried to vote. After Norman was twice turned away, white violence broke out, resulting in a riot through the black community, leaving an estimated 50 to 60 African-Americans dead and all the properties destroyed. Many blacks fled from Ocoee to save their lives, and the town became all-white. Voting efforts were suppressed for decades.


=== Later 20th century to present ===

Economically destroyed at the turn of the century by the decimation of the citrus industry, many farmers walked away from the region. The freeze caused many farmers in central Florida to move to other warm climates, such as to the Caribbean or to California (such as the similarly named Orange County, California). Others awaited other opportunities. One of the region's major land owners and growers was the Tropicana company. They withdrew rather than try to come back from these seemingly endless generational decimation. With no realistic avenues for agricultural use of this rural land, and Florida's continuing strong population growth and its attendant needs (aided and supported by the success of nearby Walt Disney World and Universal Studios Florida), these areas began to be developed for housing and other industries, especially after World War II.
In 1962 Orlando Jetport was built. The predecessor of modern-day Orlando International Airport, it was built from a portion of the McCoy Air Force Base. By 1970, four major airlines (Delta Air Lines, National Airlines, Eastern Airlines, and Southern Airways) had begun providing scheduled flights. McCoy Air Force Base officially closed in 1975, in which the airport still retains the former Air Force Base airport code (MCO).
In 1965, Walt Disney announced plans to build Walt Disney World. The renowned resort opened in October 1971. This had a seismic impact to the region, resulting in an explosive growth in the county's population and in its economy. The success of Disney World, allowed for other theme parks and entertainment attractions to open and thrive in the county, such as Universal Orlando and SeaWorld Orlando. The county now has more theme parks and entertainment attractions than anywhere else in the world.
In the 21st century, the county's economy has since diversified. Despite the rapid development in the county, thanks to gentrification relics of the historic core of "Old Orlando" still reside in downtown Orlando (along Church Street, between Orange Avenue and Garland Avenue), as well as within Orange County communities outside city limits, such as in Eatonville, Windermere, and Winter Park.


== Geography ==

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of 1,003 square miles (2,600 km2), of which 903 square miles (2,340 km2) is land and 100 square miles (260 km2) (10.0%) is water. Orange County is about 89 feet (27 m) above sea level. The county is bordered by Osceola County by the south, on the southwest by Polk County, on the west by Lake County, on the north by Seminole County, on the northeast by Volusia County, and on the east by Brevard County.

Most of the county lies in the Florida coastal lowlands, while the northwestern areas rise into the Florida Central Highlands.  The population center of the county is in the central and western sections in the transition zone from coastal plain to highlands, whereas eastern sections in the coastal plain are more remote in population. Orange County was part of the first land to rise up below from below the Early Oligocene sea about 33.9–28.4 million years ago, also known as Orange Island.
The headwaters for the Kissimmee River, which forms the northern part of the Everglades, are located in the county. Boggy Creek rises from the Orlando International Airport at 70 feet (21 m) above sea level, which is the primary inflow for East Lake Tohopekaliga in nearby Osceola County. Other watersheds within the county include the Ocklawaha and Wekiva rivers, along with the Upper and Middle basins, which are all sub-watersheds within the extensive St. Johns watershed. Lake Apopka is located in the county, on the course of the Ocklawaha River, and is the fourth largest lake in the state of Florida. Wekiwa Springs State Park is a 7,000-acre (28 km2) Florida State Park along the course of the Wekiva River.
Despite Orange County being landlocked in the center of the state, it is still relatively close to many beaches to the east on the Atlantic Ocean, with Cocoa Beach being the closest and a popular destination. The Gulf of Mexico is also relatively close, although a bit farther away, to the west, with many beaches like Clearwater Beach and St. Pete Beach also being popular destinations.


=== Regions of Orange County ===

Orange County is divided into six regions; the (central) Downtown area (with urban characteristics); the (southwestern) tourist strip (with a mixture of permanent dwellings, resorts, and hotels); a mixture of working-class, middle-class, and wealthier suburbs in the west (with some exurban characteristics); more historically established suburbs to the north (with inner-ring characteristics, attributed to the SunRail); a mixture of suburbs with more accessibly priced homes in the east (within the influence of University of Central Florida); and working-class neighborhoods and additional tourist attractions to the south (within the influence of nearby Kissimmee in neighboring Osceola County). Florida's Turnpike is popularly regarded as a dividing line between northern areas catering more to permanent residents and southern areas catering more to tourists.
There are 115 neighborhoods within the city limits of Orlando, along with many municipalities and unincorporated areas throughout the county. Orlando's city limits resemble a checkerboard, with pockets of unincorporated Orange County surrounded by city limits. Such an arrangement results in some areas being served by both Orange County and the City of Orlando. This also explains Orlando's relatively low city population when compared to its metropolitan population. The city and county are working together in an effort to "round-out" the city limits with Orlando annexing portions of land already bordering the city limits.
The center of government, commerce and culture in the county, is in Downtown Orlando, bordered by Marks Street in the north, Mills Avenue (SR 15) in the east, Orange Blossom Trail in the west, and Kaley Avenue in the south. Mostly composed of high-rise residential towers and office towers, 46 of the 79 high-rises in the Greater Orlando region are located in downtown. Dr. Phillips Center for the Performing Arts, Kia Center, Lake Eola, Orlando Museum of Art, and other attractions are located in downtown, along with corporate offices for banks such as Wells Fargo, Seacoast, and Suntrust banks, and government building such as Orange County Courthouse and Orlando City Hall.
In the southern region of the county is the rapidly growing community of Lake Nona. Along with being home to Lake Nona Golf & Country Club, it is also the health district for the city of Orlando, with Lake Nona Medical City. Featuring Nemours Children's Hospital, University of Central Florida's Health Sciences Campus, which includes the university's College of Medicine, Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Nursing, College of Dental Medicine, a teaching hospital, and other healthcare amenities.

The main tourist strip for the city is in the southwestern section of the county. International Drive, commonly known as I-Drive, is a major 11.1-mile (17.9 km) thoroughfare that traverses central and southern portions of unincorporated Orange County. An additional extension is known as International Drive South, partly located in the northern portion of Osceola County. Other major roads in this region include, Sand Lake Road, Kirkman Road, SR 536, and Universal Boulevard, which runs parallel to the midsection of International Drive. At its northern end, International Drive is home to Orlando International Premium Outlets and Universal Orlando resort, along with being in close proximity to the Epic Universe theme park that opened in May 2025. Further south on International Drive, it features the Orange County Convention Center, Dezerland Park mall, SeaWorld Orlando (along with Aquatica, SeaWorld's water park), ICON Park (featuring its famous Ferris wheel, Orlando Eye), the World's Largest Entertainment McDonald's, and other tourist ventures. This region is most known for being the location of Walt Disney World Resort, which covers nearly 25,000 acres (39 sq mi; 101 km2) (of which half has been developed). The Central Florida Tourism Oversight District (formerly the Reedy Creek Improvement District) is the governing jurisdiction and special taxing district for the land of Disney World, encompassing a large swath of 39.06 sq mi (101.2 km2) in southern Orange county and northern Osceola County. It acts with most of the same authority and responsibility as a county government. It includes the cities of Bay Lake and Lake Buena Vista, as well as unincorporated land, within Orange County. Other communities in southwestern Orange County, which have primarily suburban and exurban characteristics, include Bay Hill, Dr. Phillips, Four Corners, Horizon West, MetroWest, Williamsburg, and Windermere.
Orange County communities due west of Downtown Orlando, which primarily have exurban characteristics, include Apopka, Gotha, Oakland, Ocoee, Pine Hills, Tildenville, and Winter Garden. Orange County communities due north of Downtown Orlando, which are primarily more well-established and that have suburban and urban characteristics, include Baldwin Park, Eatonville, Fairview Shores, Goldenrod, Lockhart, Maitland, and Winter Park. Orange County communities due east of Downtown Orlando, which primarily have suburban and rural characteristics, include Alafaya, Avalon Park, Azalea Park, Bithlo, Christmas, Union Park, and Wedgefield. The east side of the county is also the home of the University of Central Florida (UCF). Orange County communities due south of Downtown Orlando, which primarily have suburban characteristics, include Conway, Hunter's Creek, Lake Nona, Meadow Woods, Oak Ridge, Southchase, and Taft.


=== Communities ===

Orange County includes 13 incorporated areas, 38 census-designated places, and 7 unincorporated regions.


=== Adjacent counties ===
Seminole County - north
Volusia County - northeast
Brevard County - east
Osceola County - south
Polk County - southwest
Lake County - west


=== Climate ===


== Demographics ==


== Economy ==


=== Corporate ===

ABC Fine Wine & Spirits, Atlantic.net, Central Florida Expressway Authority, Darden Restaurants, Miller's Ale House, Planet Hollywood, and Tijuana Flats (among others)  have their corporate headquarters in the county.
Other companies with offices in the county include (but are not limited to):

Amazon
JetBlue
Lockheed Martin
Tupperware
Orange County Convention Center is a convention center located in the aforementioned county. It is the primary public convention center for the Central Florida region and the second-largest convention center in the United States, after McCormick Place in Chicago. Located on the south end of International Drive, the OCCC offers 7,000,000 sq ft (650,000 m2) of space, 2,100,000 sq ft (200,000 m2) of which is exhibit space. The OCCC hosts events attracting about 1.5 million people annually, injecting $2.5 billion into the region's economy.


=== Healthcare ===

Orange County has been a growing-hub for healthcare in Central Florida. Two of the largest healthcare networks in the county are AdventHealth and Orlando Health, which were both founded in the county. Currently, the headquarters for Orlando Health is in Orange County, whereas the headquarters for AdventHealth is located in neighboring Seminole County.
Lake Nona Medical City (a master-planned community) is a 650-acre (260 ha) health and life sciences park in Lake Nona. The city is home to the University of Central Florida's Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, the College of Medicine, the College of Nursing, and the College of Dental Medicine, along with its teaching hospital. The city also includes the Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, Nemours Children's Hospital, and the University of Florida's College of Pharmacy (ranked #5 among all pharmacy schools in the nation).


=== Shopping ===

The transient nature of Orange County makes it a major regional commercial hub for the State of Florida. The Florida Mall is located in unincorporated Orange County, and with a gross leasable area of 1,718,000 square feet (159,600 m2) it is one of the largest single-story malls in the United States and the largest mall in Central Florida. With over 250 stores and various dining options (including 25 quick-service restaurants and 8 sit-down restaurants), The Florida Mall attracts over 20 million visitors annually, including domestic and international tourists.
Disney Springs (formerly Downtown Disney) is an outdoor shopping, dining, and entertainment complex at the Walt Disney World Resort in Lake Buena Vista. The 120-acre (49 ha) complex includes four distinct areas: Marketplace, The Landing, Town Center, and West Side. Walt Disney Imagineers took inspiration from real coastal towns in Florida, such as St. Augustine and Coral Gables. Universal CityWalk in Orlando is the entertainment and retail district located adjacent to the theme parks of Universal Studios Florida and Universal Islands of Adventure at Universal Orlando.
Other regional shopping destinations in the county include Dezerland Park Orlando, Disney's Flamingo Crossings, The Mall at Millenia, Orlando Fashion Square, Orlando International Premium Outlets, Orlando Vineland Premium Outlets, Waterford Lakes Town Center, West Oaks Mall, Winter Garden Village, and Winter Park Village.


=== Sports ===

Orange County hosts two major league professional sports teams: the Orlando Magic of the National Basketball Association (NBA), and Orlando City SC of Major League Soccer (MLS). There are also minor league professional teams, such as the Orlando Solar Bears of the ECHL, the Orlando Predators of the National Arena League (NAL), and the Orlando Anarchy of the Women's Football Alliance. The UCF Knights, the athletics teams of the University of Central Florida, compete in NCAA Division I.
The ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex is a 220-acre (89 ha) multi-purpose sports complex located at Walt Disney World in Bay Lake. The complex includes nine venues, hosting professional and amateur sporting events throughout the year. Most notable of events hosted at the venues include the 2020 NBA Bubble (due to the COVID-19 pandemic), the MLS is Back tournament, the 2016 Invictus Games, the Pro Bowl skills competition from 2017 to 2020, the 1997 U.S. Men's Clay Court Championships, and the 2022 Special Olympics USA Games. The Atlanta Braves utilized the facilities for spring training from 1997 to 2019, along with the Tampa Bay Rays utilizing the complex in 2023 spring training, due to Charlotte Sports Park being heavily damaged by Hurricane Ian in the previous year.
The Arnold Palmer Invitational on the PGA Tour is played each March at the Bay Hill Club and Lodge, a private golf resort owned since 1974 by Arnold Palmer in the community of Bay Hill. Other notable golf clubs in the county are the Eagle Creek Golf Club, the Lake Nona Golf & Country Club, and the Rio Pinar Country Club. The Golf Channel was formerly headquartered in Orange County. However, in February 2020, it was reported that the Golf Channel would consolidate its television operations with the remainder of NBC Sports at its facilities in Stamford, Connecticut. GolfNow and GolfPass services continue to primarily operate out of the greater Orlando area.


=== Tourism and hospitality ===

Tourism remains at the core of Orange County's economy. Nicknamed the 'Theme Park Capital of the World', the county is home to Walt Disney World, Universal Orlando, and SeaWorld Orlando, among many other theme parks. As of 2022, with over 2.9 million visitors, Orlando was the third-most visited city in the U.S. after New York City and Miami. Orlando International Airport is the 7th-busiest airport in the United States and the 18th-busiest in the world. The county features 7 of the 10 most visited theme parks in North America (5 of the top 10 in the world), as well as the 4 most visited water parks in the U.S. The Walt Disney World resort is the area's largest attraction. The resort is home to, the Magic Kingdom, Epcot, Disney's Hollywood Studios, Disney's Animal Kingdom, Disney's Typhoon Lagoon, Disney's Blizzard Beach and Disney Springs. Universal Orlando encompasses Universal Studios Florida, Universal Islands of Adventure, Universal Volcano Bay and Universal CityWalk. SeaWorld Orlando is an animal theme park, featuring numerous marine wildlife displays, alongside an amusement park, Aquatica water park, and Discovery Cove. Other theme parks include Fun Spot Orlando, Icon Park, Madame Tussauds, and Sealife Aquarium.
Along with these tourist offerings, the county is also home to the corporate headquarters for these theme parks' operations. One of the two corporate headquarters for Disney Experiences is located in Lake Buena Vista (the other headquarters is located in Glendale, California). There were reportedly plans from Disney, that they were to expand more of their corporate presence in Orange County, with the transferring of DPEP positions over the next couple of years to a new 60-acre corporate campus in the Lake Nona area of the county, with as many as 90% of the transferred positions being Imagineering positions. However, the planned relocation was cancelled in May 2023 amidst the feud between Disney and Florida's governor Ron DeSantis. United Parks & Resorts (formerly SeaWorld Entertainment Inc. or SeaWorld Parks & Entertainment) is an American theme park and entertainment company, with corporate headquarters located in Orange County. Along with SeaWorld, United Parks & Resorts is the parent company for the theme parks Adventure Island, Aquatica, Busch Gardens, Discovery Cove, Sesame Place, Water Country USA, and Worlds of Discovery.
In-turn, hospitality is incredibly vital to the county's economy. Westgate Resorts, an American timeshare resort company, was founded and is currently headquartered in the county. As of July 2021, Westgate Resorts has 22 locations across the United States. Other major hospitality companies with a significant economic presence (both corporate and in its resort properties) within the county include:

Hilton Grand Vacations Club
Marriott Vacation Club International
Ryman Hospitality Properties
Travel + Leisure Co. (formerly part of Wyndham Worldwide)


== Government ==

The county functions under a charter form of government. The charter serves as a constitution, detailing the structure and operation of the local government. A Charter Review Commission has the power to consider and place amendments on the ballot. Voters then decide whether to accept or reject all amendments put forth. If voters approve an amendment, it is then inserted into the charter.


=== Federal representation ===
Four districts of the U.S. House of Representatives represent parts of Orange County.

District 8 encompasses all of Brevard and Indian River Counties and far eastern Orange County. District 9 encompasses all of Osceola County, eastern Polk County and southern Orange County. District 10 encompasses most of Orange County. District 11 encompasses all of Sumter County, and parts of Lake, Polk, and western Orange County.


=== State representation ===
Orange County residents are represented in Tallahassee with 3 Senate seats.

District 11 encompasses northwestern Orange County, District 13 encompasses north central and northeastern Orange County, and District 15 encompasses all of Osceola County and the southern third of Orange County.
Orange County residents are represented in Tallahassee with 9 House seats.

District 37 encompasses southern Seminole and portions of northern Orange County, Districts 35, 46, and 47 encompass Osceola County and Orange County, and Districts 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, and 44 are wholly composed of Orange.


=== County representation ===

Orange County is served by a board of commissioners. The board consists of an elected mayor and six commissioners. The mayor is elected At-large, while commissioners are elected from single-member districts. The mayor and commissioners each serve staggered four-year terms. Commissioners from Districts 1, 3, and 5 are elected in presidential election years, while the mayor and commissioners from Districts 2, 4, and 6 are elected in alternate years. The county is also served by a clerk of courts, sheriff, property appraiser, tax collector, supervisor of elections, state attorney, and public defender. All positions are four-year terms, requiring direct election by voters in presidential election years.


== Politics ==
Orange County is located along the pivotal Interstate 4 corridor, which until recently  was a powerful swing region in what was one of the country's most critical swing states. Many close elections were won or lost depending on the voting outcome along the corridor. Voters were considered independent, traditionally splitting their votes, electing Democrats and Republicans on the same ballot. As a result of such independence, voters were inundated with non-stop television and radio ads months preceding a general election.
Orange County was one of the first areas of Florida to turn Republican. It swung from a 15-point victory for Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1944 to a seven-point victory for Thomas E. Dewey in 1948. It eventually became one of the stronger Republican bastions in Florida, as evidenced when it gave Barry Goldwater 56 percent of its vote in 1964. For most of the second half of the 20th century, it was one of the more conservative urban counties in Florida and the nation. From 1948 to 1988, Democrats only cracked the 40 percent barrier twice, in 1964 and 1976. However, the Republican edge narrowed considerably in the 1990s. George H. W. Bush fell from 67 percent of the vote in 1988 to only 45.9 percent in 1992. In 1996, Bob Dole only won the county by 520 votes.
In September 2000, Democrats overtook Republicans in voter registration. This was a factor in Al Gore becoming the first Democratic presidential candidate to carry the county since 1944. John Kerry narrowly carried the county in 2004 by less than 1,000 votes. In 2008, however, Orange County swung hard to Barack Obama, who won it by the largest margin for a Democrat since Roosevelt. In the years since, it has become one of the strongest Democratic bastions in Florida.
Since 2000, Republicans have yet to retake the advantage they once enjoyed. In the twelve years that followed, Democrats experienced a modest increase in their voter registration percentage from 41.40% to 42.73% of the electorate. Minor party voters also had modest growth, increasing from 2.17% to 2.37%. In contrast, Republicans experienced a sharp decrease in registered voters, sliding from 40.95% in 2000 down to 29.85% in 2012. The beneficiary of the Republican losses have been unaffiliated voters. The percentage of the electorate identifying as an unaffiliated voter increased from 15.47% to 25.06% during this same period. Orange County is one of two different counties in the entire nation to have voted for Al Gore in 2000 after voting for Dole in 1996, a distinction it shares with Charles County, Maryland.
However, Orange County went to Kamala Harris by just 13 points in 2024, the closest margin in Orange County since 2004. This made Orange County one of just six Florida counties to go for Harris as Donald Trump won the former swing state of Florida by 13 points. Florida is now considered a red state and presidential campaigns are unlikely to focus on the state in the future.


=== Voter registration ===


== Education ==


=== Public education ===
The Orange County Public Schools deliver public education to students countywide. Its functions and expenditures are overseen by an elected school board composed of a chairman, elected at-large; and seven members, elected from single-member districts. Each member is elected to a four-year term: the chairman and three other members are elected in gubernatorial election years, while the other four are elected in presidential election years. As of the 2021–2022 school year, the school system operated 205 schools (127 elementary, 9 K-8, 39 middle, 22 high, and 8 exceptional learning), with 206,246 students. As of 2023, it is the 4th largest district statewide and eighth largest in the nation.


=== Colleges and universities ===

The University of Central Florida is the sole 4-year public university. As of the Fall 2020 semester, a total of 71,948 students attended the university, making it the largest university in the nation by enrollment. The university's 1,415 acre main campus is situated in northeast Orange County.
Nearby Winter Park is home to Rollins College, a private college situated only a few miles from Downtown Orlando. In 2012, it was ranked #1 by U.S. News & World Report amongst regional universities in the South.
With six campuses spread throughout the county, Valencia College offers two-year degree programs, as well three baccalaureate programs.
The law schools for Barry University and Florida A&M are also conveniently located in Downtown Orlando.
Full Sail University is a for-profit university in Winter Park, Florida. Full Sail is not regionally accredited, but is nationally accredited by the Accrediting Commission of Career Schools and Colleges (ACCSC) to award associate's, bachelor's degrees, and master's degrees in audio, film, design, computer animation, business, and other fields.[10] The school offers 35 degree programs and 2 graduate certificates and has a student population of more than 16,800.


== Libraries ==
Orange County is served by the Orange County Library System, which was established in 1923. Before the opening of the Albertson Public Library in 1923, a circulating library maintained by the Sorosis Club of Orlando offered book lending services to patrons on a subscription basis. The Albertson Public Library was established with the collection of Captain Charles L. Albertson and the library was named in his honor. In 1924, the Booker T. Washington Branch of the Albertson Library was established to service the African American community of Orlando. In 1966, the current Orlando Public Library building was completed on the grounds of the Albertson Public Library. Currently there are 16 libraries within the Orange County Library system. The library systems offers a diverse selection of materials, free programs and free access to various databases. In addition, the library offers free delivery of most items through its MAYL service.
One exception exists in the cities of Maitland and Winter Park which are each part of a separate library taxing districts and as a result residents of these cities are not entitled to receive resident borrowing privileges at OCLS branches even though they are technically and legally residents of Orange County, instead an agreement was reached between Maitland, Winter Park and the OCLS whereas a resident of those cities can go to any OCLS branch and request a "Reciprocal borrower card" which is provided free of charge. The Reciprocal borrower cards is valid for one year and can be used at any OCLS branch with the exception of the Melrose Center at the Orlando Public Library which requires a separate Melrose Center specific card which is issued after the user applies for the card and goes through a mandatory orientation class. Access to the OCLS Internet on library owned PCs requires a Reciprocal borrower to pay small session access fee. The OCLS Wi-Fi network which is available at all branches remains free of charge to all users including Reciprocal borrowers and visitors who use their own iPad, Mac, PC, Smartphone or tablet devices. Maitland and Winter Park Library do not provide reciprocal privileges to OCLS patrons and charge non-residents a yearly user fee.


== Sites of interest ==


=== Museums ===
Albin Polasek House and Studio
Casa Feliz
Central Florida Railroad Museum
Charles Hosmer Morse Museum of American Art
Corporal Larry E. Smedley National Vietnam War Museum
Crealdé School of Art
Maitland Historical Museum
Maitland Telephone Museum
Mennello Museum of American Art
Museum of the Apopkans
Orange County Regional History Center
Orlando Museum of Art
Orlando Science Center
Pulse Memorial and Museum (still in development, as of 2024)
Randall Made Knives
Ripley's Believe It or Not!
Rollins Museum of Art
Well'sbuilt Hotel
William H. Waterhouse House
Winter Garden Heritage Foundation
Winter Park Historical Museum
Withers-Maguire House
WonderWorks
Zora Neale Hurston Museum of Fine Arts


=== Culture and wildlife ===

Annie Russell Theatre
Beacham Theatre
Bob Carr Theater
Dr. Phillips Center for the Performing Arts
Dr. Phillips House
Enzian Theater
Garden Theatre
Gatorland
Harry P. Leu Gardens
Hollywood Hills Amphitheater
Kraft Azalea Park
Palm Cottage Gardens
The Plaza Live
Sci-Fi Dine-In Theater Restaurant
Universal Music Plaza Stage


=== Themed attractions ===


=== Parks ===


=== Sports venues ===

Addition Financial Arena - Located on the main campus of UCF, it is the home to the UCF Knights men's and women's basketball teams
Camping World Stadium - The current home venue of the Citrus Bowl and the Pop-Tarts Bowl
FBC Mortgage Stadium - Located on the main campus of UCF, it is the home field of the UCF Knights football team of NCAA Division I FBS college football
Inter&Co Stadium - The home stadium for the Orlando City SC (MLS) and Orlando Pride (NWSL) soccer teams
Kia Center – The home venue for the Orlando Magic (NBA basketball), Orlando Solar Bears (ECHL ice hockey), and the Orlando Predators (AFL indoor American football
The Stadium at the ESPN Wide World of Sports
The Venue at UCF - Located on the main campus of UCF, it is home to UCF's volleyball team


=== Golf courses ===
Bay Hill Club and Lodge
Eagle Creek Golf Club
Lake Nona Golf & Country Club
Orange County National Golf Center
Rio Pinar Country Club
Winter Park Country Club and Golf Course


== Transportation ==


=== Airports ===
Orlando Apopka Airport, a privately owned uncontrolled, public-use airport in the City of Apopka which serves small private aircraft, there is no commercial service.
Orlando Executive Airport, a public airport owned by GOAA which serves private jets and small aircraft. It is a reliever airport for Orlando International Airport.
Orlando International Airport, the busiest airport in Florida by passenger traffic, is a public international airport owned by GOAA serving both commercial and private aircraft.


=== Major highways ===


=== Public transportation ===
Amtrak a nationwide rail service with two stations in Orange County, Orlando and Winter Park
Brightline, a high-speed rail line which operates service from Orlando International Airport to West Palm Beach, Fort Lauderdale and Miami which started on September 22, 2023
Greyhound a U.S. Intercity common carrier bus company providing nationwide service from Orlando.
Lynx a public bus authority providing service in Orange County and five additional Central Florida counties including Lake, Osceola, Polk, Seminole and Volusia.
SunRail a commuter rail service with eight stations serving Orange County and eight additional stations in three adjacent counties (Osceola, Volusia and Seminole).


== Communities ==


=== Cities ===


=== Towns ===
Eatonville
Oakland
Windermere


=== Census-designated places ===


=== Other unincorporated communities ===
Andover Lakes
Chinatown
Fairvilla
Killarney
Plymouth
Reedy Creek Improvement District
Vineland


== See also ==
Innovation Way
List of amusement parks in Central Florida
List of tallest buildings in Orlando
Mayor of Orange County
National Register of Historic Places listings in Orange County, Florida
Board of County Commissioners
Orange County Health Department
Teresa Jacobs
Walt Before Mickey, a locally shot film about Walt Disney creating Mickey Mouse


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Orange County Regional History Center
The West Orange Times newspaper that serves Orange County, Florida available in full-text with images in Florida Digital Newspaper Library
Orange County Health Department Archived March 4, 2021, at the Wayback Machine
Orange County Collection on RICHES Mosaic Interface Archived April 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine