Reuben Christopher Langdon (born July 19, 1975) is an American former stuntman and voice actor. He has provided the voice and motion capture for video game characters including Dante in the Devil May Cry series (starting from Devil May Cry 3: Dante's Awakening) and Ken Masters in the Street Fighter series (from Street Fighter IV up to Street Fighter V) and Super Smash Bros. Ultimate.


== Early life ==
Reuben Christopher Langdon was born in Anchorage, Alaska on July 19, 1975, and grew up in Georgia.


== Career ==
Langdon began acting in Japan in B-Fighter Kabuto. Some action scenes from the show were reused in the US show Beetleborgs Metallix. Langdon moved to Hong Kong, where he continued to work on films.
He had a cameo role in Power Rangers Time Force in 2001 and performed a number of stunts in Power Rangers: Lost Galaxy and Power Rangers: Lightspeed Rescue. Langdon has done stunts for television including CSI: Miami and Dexter. Besides these, he has done stunts in movies such as The Medallion, Spider-Man 2, Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End, Night at the Museum 2, Ant-Man, Scott Pilgrim vs. the World and Avatar.
Langdon's sound performances are done mainly in Capcom video games. He first voiced Dante in Devil May Cry 3 and reprised the role in Devil May Cry 4, Devil May Cry 5 and Marvel vs. Capcom series (since Marvel vs. Capcom 3). Langdon dubbed characters in the English Devil May Cry anime series. In addition, he voiced Ken Masters, the narrator of Street Fighter IV and Street Fighter IV: The Ties That Bind.
For Devil May Cry 3, Devil May Cry 4 and Devil May Cry 5, Langdon also did the motion capture for certain scenes. During the development of Devil May Cry 3, Langdon found that doing the motion capture of Dante was difficult to the multiple moves the character makes. Langdon often discussed with the staff about Dante's characterization that was different from the original one as they wanted "a different spin." Eventually, Langdon decided to do his own rendition of Dante as he was confused with the staff's suggestions. In retrospective, Langdon finds Dante "the most difficult, frustrating and yet rewarding character" he has ever played and stated he grew attached with him. Langdon was told to make Devil May Cry 4's Dante similar to his Devil May Cry 3 persona albeit more mature. Despite the staff's concerns for the difficulties of such portrayal, Langdon had no issues after choosing Roy Focker from the anime series The Super Dimension Fortress Macross as his character model and noting he had almost the same age as Dante during production of the game. Langdon's performance as Dante in Devil May Cry 3 and Devil May Cry 4 received praise by GamesRadar for being the character's best voice actor noting that the two previous actors did not fit the character well.
Langdon has also done stunt work for the Uncharted series and The Last of Us (including stunt-work for its companion game Left Behind) where he played the character James, both games working opposite Nolan North. Through his work with the motion capture studio Just Cause Productions, he has been a part of the motion-capture process for many games developed around the world, such as the remakes of Resident Evil 2 and Resident Evil 3.
Langdon also stars in the music video for "Over 'Quartzer,'" the theme song for Kamen Rider Zi-O.
Langdon did not reprise his role as Ken in Street Fighter 6, claiming this was due to a Newsweek interview that painted him in a bad light.
During the announcement of the Devil May Cry Netflix series, it was revealed that fellow Devil May Cry actor Johnny Yong Bosch would be replacing Langdon as Dante. When asked why Langdon was not voicing the character, Bosch responded that in an Instagram reply that Langdon had quit acting.


== Personal life ==
While filming a documentary in Guatemala in February 2019, the car Langdon and Steve Copeland were in was shot at. The gunman then tried to break into the vehicle and opened fire again as the pair sped away. Reuben Langdon has been critical of the Black Lives Matter and the MeToo movements, saying that "it just creates more conflict and will never end because they will always be throwing people under the bus." Reuben Langdon has also used his social media account to express interest in COVID-19 and anti-vaccination conspiracy theories.


== Belief in Extraterrestrial Life ==
Langdon claims to have had his first UFO sighting in the late 2000s, which sparked his interest in ufology and the paranormal. He has since spent time researching extraterrestrials, and is the creator and host of the web show Interview With E.D. (Extra-Dimensionals). In 2013, he co-produced a five-day event called the Citizen Hearing on Disclosure at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C. The event brought together over 40 people, mostly ex-government and military, to testify in front of six former U.S. Congress members in a mock congressional hearing about the possibility of aliens interacting with humans. He has claimed that this event is the most comprehensive body of evidence and testimony delivered to the public on the subject of aliens.


== Filmography ==


=== Stunts ===


=== Acting ===


=== Animation ===


=== Video games ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Reuben Langdon at IMDb