The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov (Russian: Другая Россия Э. В. Лимонова, romanized: Drugáya Rossíya E. V. Limónova), formerly The Other Russia (Russian: Другая Россия, romanized: Drugáya Rossíya), is an unregistered National Bolshevik political party in Russia, founded in July 2010 by Eduard Limonov. The Other Russia was reorganized in September 2020 and changed its name to  "The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov", in honor of their deceased founder who died the same year. Its members are known as Nazbols (Russian: нацболы). As a Russian political party adopting syncretic politics, it has been variously called far-left and far-right by the likes of Malaysia's The Sun, France's Le Point, and BFM TV, Belgium's RTBF, and Eurasia Daily Monitor and the Czech Republic's Expactz.cz, respectively.


== History ==


=== Origins ===
The Other Russia was established on 10 July 2010 by former members of the banned National Bolshevik Party during their congress in Moscow.  On 21 January 2011, The Other Russia was denied registration by the Federal Registration Service because they did not have enough popular support among the Russian people.


=== Activity ===

Three members of the party were arrested and beaten for their role in the 2010 Manezhnaya Square riot trials. These arrests were flagged by human rights organizations as politically motivated by the members' involvement in The Other Russia.
National Bolsheviks members of The Other Russia participated in the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine. Members of the party formed armed troops Interbrigades and two members of The Other Russia were killed during the war in Donbas.
On 6 November 2017, several party's activists were arrested in Saint Petersburg for unauthorized protest as they commemorated the Bolshevik Revolution centenary.
On 7 February 2018, Kirill Ananiev, a veteran member of the banned National Bolshevik Party and The Other Russia, was killed in the air strikes during the Battle of Khasham.
On 22 September 2018, the special congress of The Other Russia party was held in Moscow. Eduard Limonov and another leaders gave their speeches. The congress was attended by delegates from regional branches of the party. Beness Aijo participated as representative of the Russian people's militias in Ukraine.
During the International Security Exhibition in Moscow on 26 October 2018, The Other Russia activist Olga Shalina cut her veins in act of symbolic protest against the violation of human rights in Russia and in the Russian penitentiary system. Shalina spoke about conditions in Russian prisons and spread leaflets criticizing police, shouting "Freedom for prisoners!"
Limonov died on 17 March 2020 in Moscow. In September 2020, The Other Russia was re-organized and changed the party's name to  "The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov", to honor their deceased founder. In May 2023, the party was active in organizing meetings and press conferences for Angry Patriots Club and actively oppose the arrest of Igor Girkin.


== Notable members ==
Eduard Limonov
Andrei Dmitriev
Beness Aijo
Aleksandr Averin


== See also ==
National Bolshevik Party
Popular Resistance Association
National Bolshevism
The Other Russia (coalition)
Strategy-31
Russo-Ukrainian War


== References ==


== External links ==
(in Russian) The Other Russia - official site.
(in Russian) The Other Russia official blog.
(in Russian) The Other Russia on Telegram.
(in Russian) The Other Russia on Twitter.
(in Russian) The Other Russia on YouTube.
(in English) The Other Russia - book by Eduard Limonov at the Wayback Machine (archived 25 November 2006).
(in Russian) Total Mobilization. Official organ of The Other Russia.
(in English) In Ukraine, foreigners fight for socialism and Greater Russia. An interview with national-Bolshevik Beness Aijo, member of The Other Russia.