Events in the year 1944 in Germany.


== Incumbent ==


=== National level ===
Head of State and Chancellor

Adolf Hitler (the Führer) (Nazi Party)


== Events ==

4 January — World War II: The Battle of Monte Cassino begins.
20 January — World War II: The Royal Air Force drops 2,300 tons of bombs on Berlin.
27 January — World War II: The 3-year Siege of Leningrad is lifted.
29 January — World War II: The Battle of Cisterna takes place.
15 February — World War II – Battle of Monte Cassino: A monastery atop Monte Cassino is destroyed by Allied bombing.
20 February — World War II: The "Big Week" begins with American bomber raids on German aircraft manufacturing centers.
26 February — Holocaust: Shooting begins on the Nazi propaganda film, The Fuehrer Gives a Village to the Jews in Theresienstadt.
15 March — World War II: Battle of Monte Cassino: Allied aircraft bomb German-held monastery and stage an assault.
17 March — World War II: The Nazis execute almost 400 prisoners, Soviet citizens and anti-fascist Romanians at Rîbniţa.
19 March — World War II: Germany's Panzerfaust occupy Hungary.
23 March — World War II: Members of the Italian Resistance attack Nazis marching in Via Rasella, killing 33.
9 May — World War II: In the Ukrainian city of Sevastopol, Soviet troops completely drive out German forces, who had been ordered by Hitler to “fight to the last man.”
12 May — World War II: Soviet troops finalize the liberation of the Crimea.
15 May — Holocaust: Deportation of Hungarian Jews to Auschwitz begins.
18 May — World War II: Battle of Monte Cassino: The Germans evacuate Monte Cassino and Allied forces take the stronghold after a struggle that claimed 20,000 lives.
June — German V-2 rockets on test from Peenemünde become the first man-made objects to enter space. By the end of the month, more than 380,000 Hungarian Jews have been transferred to concentration camps - around half of the country's Jewish population.
4 June — World War II: A hunter-killer group of the United States Navy captures the German submarine U-505, marking the first time a U.S. Navy vessel has captured an enemy vessel at sea since the 19th century.
5 June — World War II: More than 1,000 British bombers drop 5,000 tons of bombs on German gun batteries on the Normandy coast in preparation for D-Day.
5 June — The German Navy's Enigma messages are decoded almost in real time.
6 June —  World War II: Battle of Normandy: Operation Overlord, commonly known as D-Day, commences with the landing of 155,000 Allied troops on the beaches of Normandy in France. The Allied soldiers quickly break through the Atlantic Wall and push inland, in the largest amphibious military operation in history. This operation helps liberate France from Germany, and also weakens the Nazi hold on Europe.
10 June — World War II: 642 men, women and children are killed in the Oradour-sur-Glane massacre in France.
13 June — World War II: Germany launches a V1 Flying Bomb attack on England.
22 June — World War II: Operation Bagration: A general attack by Soviet forces clears the German forces from Belarus, resulting in the destruction of German Army Group Centre, possibly the greatest defeat of the Wehrmacht during World War II.
3 July — World War II: Soviet troops liberate Minsk.
7 July — Holocaust: Hungarian Regent Horthy orders Jewish transports to Auschwitz halted; 437,000 Jews have already been deported, mostly to their deaths.
10 July — World War II: Soviet troops begin operations to occupy the Baltic countries.
31 July — World War II: Vilnius is liberated.
20 July — World War II: Adolf Hitler survives an assassination attempt, led by Claus von Stauffenberg.
24 July — Holocaust: Russian troops liberate the first concentration camp, at Majdanek, where 360,000 Jews have been exterminated.
1 August — World War II: The Warsaw Uprising begins.
2 August — World War II: Turkey ends diplomatic and economic relations with Germany.
4 August — Holocaust: A tip from a Dutch informer leads the Gestapo to a sealed-off area in an Amsterdam warehouse, where they find Jewish diarist Anne Frank and her family.
5 August — Holocaust: Polish insurgents liberate a German labor camp in Warsaw, freeing 348 Jewish prisoners.
6 August — Holocaust: Łódź, the last remaining Jewish ghetto in Poland, is liquidated and 60,000 Jews are sent to Auschwitz.
19 August — World War II: An insurrection starts in Paris.
20 August — World War II: American forces successfully defeat Nazi forces at Chambois, closing the Falaise Gap.
20 August — World War II: 168 captured allied airmen, including Phil Lamason, accused of being "terror fliers" by the Gestapo, arrive at Buchenwald concentration camp.
24 August — World War II: Liberation of Paris: The Allies enter Paris, successfully completing Operation Overlord.
25 August — World War II: German surrender of Paris: General Dietrich von Choltitz surrenders Paris to the Allies in defiance of Hitler's orders to destroy it.
25 August — World War II: Maillé massacre: Massacre of 129 civilians (70% women and children) by the Gestapo at Maillé, Indre-et-Loire.
25 August — World War II: Hungary decides to continue the war together with Germany.
3 September — World War II: The Allies liberate Brussels.
4 September — World War II: Finland breaks off relations with Germany.
8 September — World War II: London is hit by a V-2 rocket for the first time.
2 October — Holocaust: Nazi troops end the Warsaw Uprising.
7 October — Holocaust: A revolt by Jewish slave labourers at Auschwitz-Birkenau results in the complete destruction of Crematory IV.
10 October — Holocaust: Porajmos: 800 Romani children are systematically murdered at the Auschwitz death camp.
14 October — World War II: German Field Marshal Erwin Rommel commits suicide rather than face execution for allegedly conspiring against Adolf Hitler.
18 October — World War II: The Volkssturm is founded on Hitler's orders.
20 October — World War II: Belgrade is liberated by Yugoslav Partisans and the Red Army.
21 October — World War II: Aachen, the first German city to fall, is captured by American troops.
25 October — World War II: The Red Army liberates Kirkenes, the first town in Norway to be liberated.
30 October — Holocaust: The last gassings take places at Auschwitz.
25 November — Holocaust: Himmler orders the destruction of the crematories at Auschwitz.
16 December — World War II: Germany begins the Ardennes offensive, later known as Battle of the Bulge.
17 December — World War II: German troops carry out the Malmedy massacre.
19 December — World War II: The entire territory of Estonia is taken by the Red Army.
31 December — World War II: Hungary declares war on Germany.


== Births ==


== Deaths ==


== References ==