From 8 May to 10 May 1999, anti-US and anti-NATO protests swept across China and the Chinese diaspora around the world, in response to the United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade. Overwhelmingly perceived as a deliberate attack, crowds tens of thousands strong, led by students, demonstrated outside US and NATO embassies and consulates in major cities. Many protesters were violent, attacking consular buildings by throwing rocks, destroying vehicles, and setting fires, although no serious injuries occurred. Large-scale protests forced the temporary closure of every US Embassy and Consulate Generals in China: Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Chengdu, and Shenyang. Further protests occurred in Shenzhen, Nanjing, Lanzhou, Hong Kong and the Portuguese territory of Macau. This represented the largest student protests in China since the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre, and remained the largest movement in Beijing until the 2005 anti-Japanese demonstrations. Globally, Chinese students and diaspora peacefully protested outside US embassies.
Western media accused Chinese media of fuelling the protests, pointing to its initial lack of reporting on the US apologies and claims of unintentionality, and rhetoric such as a People's Daily article saying NATO had intentionally "spilled Chinese blood".
The protests continued for several days, during which tens of thousands of rock-throwing protesters kept US Ambassador James Sasser and other staff trapped in the Beijing embassy. The residence of the US Consul in Chengdu was damaged by fire and protestors tried to burn the consulate in Guangzhou. There were no reported injuries. Besides the British and other NATO missions, the embassies of Albania and Ireland were also attacked.
On May 9, 1999, then-Vice President Hu Jintao delivered a national televised speech calling the act both "criminal" and "barbaric" and that it "has greatly infuriated the Chinese people." He said the unauthorized demonstrations in Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Chengdu and Shenyang reflected the anger and patriotism of the Chinese people, and which the Chinese government fully supported, but urged against extreme and illegal conduct.
Some protesters were alarmed by the nature of the NATO bombing campaign, in the name of humanitarian intervention, without United Nations Security Council approval, fearing a similar attack against China, potentially over Taiwan or Tibet. One protester told the New York Post "We know what the U.S. intention is ... Today Kosovo, tomorrow Taiwan." Some rhetoric focused on US President Bill Clinton. One sign read "Clinton, we're not Monica", referencing the 1998 Clinton–Lewinsky scandal, while another read "Clinton the second Hitler". Others focused on anti-Americanism more broadly. One student slogan read "don't take TOEFL, don't take GRE, fight wholeheartedly the American Empire". In cities without a US consulate, such as Shenzhen, protests took place outside McDonald's and Wal-Mart locations.
Global protests were typically led by students. Outside of mainland China, significant protests occurred outside the American Institute in Taiwan, including an arson attempt. In Phnom Penh, Cambodia, police fired rounds into the air when hundreds of Chinese Cambodians attempted to overrun a temporary barrier to the US embassy. Peaceful protests occurred outside US missions in Hong Kong, Seoul, Tokyo, Vientiane, Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore, and Manila.
Outside of Asia, protests occurred at Chinese embassies in every major European city, as well as Tel Aviv, Jerusalem, Cairo, Pretoria, Dar es Salaam, Islamabad, Mumbai, and Kathmandu.


== See also ==
United States bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade
NATO bombing of Yugoslavia
1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre
2005 anti-Japanese demonstrations
2019–2020 Hong Kong protests
China–United States relations


== References ==