Charles Henry Martin (October 1, 1863 – September 22, 1946) was an American Army officer and later politician in the state of Oregon. A native of Illinois, he had a 40-year career in the military including serving in conflicts from the Spanish–American War to World War I before retiring as a major general. A Democrat, he was the U.S. representative for Oregon's 3rd congressional district from 1931 to 1935 and then was the state's 21st governor from 1935 to 1939. From 1923 to 1924 he was vice president, from 1924 to 1925 president of the Aztec Club of 1847.


== Biography ==


=== Early life ===

Charles Martin was born near Albion, Illinois, on October 1, 1863. He attended Ewing College (Ewing, Illinois) for two years until he was appointed to the U.S. Military Academy. He would actively serve in the Spanish–American War, Philippine–American War, and Boxer Rebellion after graduating from West Point in 1887. In 1920, when the army's authority to maintain Jim Crow regulations seemed threatened, Martin wrote that "the negro is of very little importance... the average negro is not by any means equal to the average white man."
Martin was later a division commander of the famous Blackhawk Division during World War I and served as the U.S. Army Assistant Chief of Staff from 1922 to 1924. He was honored with the Distinguished Service Medal and two citations for bravery in action and retired from the Army as a major general on October 1, 1927, after commanding the Panama Canal Department for three years. His DSM citation reads:

The President of the United States of America, authorized by Act of Congress, July 9, 1918, takes pleasure in presenting the Army Distinguished Service Medal to Major General Charles Henry Martin, United States Army, for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished services to the Government of the United States, in a duty of great responsibility during World War I. As Commander of the 90th Division during the greater part of its service with the Army of Occupation, by his ceaseless energy he performed his duties with the utmost efficiency, giving the closest personal supervision to the training, discipline, and equipment of his Division. His brilliant professional attainments and steadfast devotion to duty were reflected in the high standards maintained throughout the organizations under his command, rendering important services to the American Expeditionary Forces.


=== Congressman and Governor ===

Martin embarked on his second career after retiring to Portland, Oregon with his wife. From March 4, 1931, to January 3, 1935, he served as a conservative Democratic Representative to the U.S. Congress from Oregon's Third Congressional District.
Martin was elected governor in 1934, during a time of intense labor turmoil and the middle of the Great Depression, earning a reputation for restoring state finances. The major issues that Martin dealt with during his time in office were economic recovery from the Great Depression, reconstruction of the Oregon State Capitol, the planning and construction of the Bonneville Dam, and the development of statewide port and highway infrastructures. When the Depression eased, he opposed the full restoration of wage levels for state employees, who had suffered a 50 percent pay cut.
Martin became known as a pro-business governor in early May 1935 when timber workers began to strike, declaring, "These pestiferous peewees would go to any lengths to embarrass me and my administration." In private correspondence and public appearances he railed against the National Labor Relations Board, declared union organizers to be gangsters and Bolsheviks, and considered Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins to be the head "red" in the Roosevelt administration.  Martin threatened to fire Columbia County Sheriff Oscar Weed for not responding harshly enough to striking workers, instructing the state's sheriffs to "beat hell out of 'em!" and "crack their damn heads! Those fellows are there for nothing but trouble – give it to them!" On May 23, 1935, Martin ordered the state police and National Guard to protect strikebreakers at the Stimson Mill strike in the Washington County town of Gaston. The National Guard was again called out to harass, intimidate, and arrest striking longshoremen in 1937.
Martin grew in his vocal opposition to Roosevelt's New Deal, especially to the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) and the President's labor policy. In 1937, the NLRB failed to settle a jurisdictional dispute between the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) and the American Federation of Labor (AFL) that had closed all Portland sawmills. Martin stepped in and held his own elections, which led to the reopening of the mills. He made himself the enemy of what many saw as corrupt labor leaders, particularly by his appointment of Assistant Attorney General Ralph E. Moody to prosecute many union people accused of arson and assault.
In 1939, Martin welcomed Harry H. Laughlin's proposal to chloroform the feeble-minded, stating, "The theory is a fine thing in principle. Civilization must find some way to best deal with this distressing situation. It is one of the problems for the young people of today." In 1936, he suggested that the state could save $300,000 in the next two years by putting 900 of the 969 developmentally-disabled patients at the Fairview Training Center in Salem "out of their misery." Martin also believed that military action was necessary against Jewish communists and Irish people.

Martin showed sympathy for fascism. Asked about the possibility of a communist takeover, he dismissed the threat, referencing Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy."There are enough strong men left in the country to handle it properly. The Italians organized their black shirts. The Germans had their brown shirts and Hitler. I don't believe Americans will submit."He was often quoted for his rephrasing of President Roosevelt's famous pronouncement on fear, saying, "We have nothing to fear from the future except our own foolishness and slothfulness." His criticism of President Roosevelt, however, cost Martin a bitterly contested bid for the Democratic Party of Oregon's gubernatorial nomination in 1938.


=== Death and legacy ===
After losing the nomination, Martin retired from active politics to his Portland home. He died on September 22, 1946, and was interred at River View Cemetery in Portland.


== Footnotes ==


== Further reading ==
Alfred F. Gunns, Civil Liberties in Crisis: The Pacific Northwest, 1917–1940. New York: Garland Publishing Co., 1983.
Gary Murrell, "Hunting Reds in Oregon, 1935–1939," Oregon Historical Quarterly, vol. 100, no. 4 (Winter 1999), pp. 374–401. In JSTOR
Gary Murrell, Iron Pants: Oregon's Anti-New Deal Governor, Charles Henry Martin. Pullman, WA: Washington State University Press, 2000. ISBN 087422196X


== External links ==

United States Congress. "Charles Martin (id: M000173)". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.
Official biography from State of Oregon website