This article lists nations, groups or tribes, as well as notable individuals, who have converted to Judaism. This article does not differentiate between the different branches of Judaism. See also Who is a Jew? on issues related to the acceptance of conversions throughout the Jewish community.
Converts are called gerei tzedek (Hebrew: גֵּרֵי צֶדֶק, lit. 'righteous foreigners').
A number of prominent celebrities, such as Madonna, Demi Moore, and Ariana Grande, have become followers of a "new age" version of Kabbalah (see Kabbalah Centre), derived from the body of Jewish mystical teaching also called Kabbalah, but do not consider themselves—and are not considered—Jewish.


== Converted nations, groups or tribes ==


=== Converted nations, groups or tribes from non-Abrahamic religions ===
Conversions throughout the Babylonian, Persian, Hellenistic, and Roman Empire periods (actual numbers and extent of proselytization disputed) See the article on proselyte: a term which initially referred to Hellenistic converts to Judaism.
Idumeans (disputed), Edom, 2nd century BCE, conquered and converted by John Hyrcanus
Ituraeans (disputed), Lebanon and Syria, 2nd century BCE, who according to Josephus, were conquered and converted by Aristobulus I
Adiabene, northern Iraq, 1st century
Helena, queen of Adiabene, from traditional Greek religion
Izates bar Monobaz, king of Adiabene, from a Persian or Mideastern religion
Symacho, wife of Izates bar Monobaz, from a Persian or Mideastern religion
Monobaz II, king of Adiabene, from a Persian or Mideastern religion
Khazars (disputed), a semi-nomadic Turkic people from Central Asia (historical Khazaria), many of whom converted to Judaism en masse in the 8th and 9th centuries CE from a Khazar religion
Bulan, king of the Khazars, from a traditional Khazar religion
Samaw'al ibn 'Adiya and his clan
Himyarite Kingdom, Yemen, 6th century
Tub'a Abu Kariba As'ad, from Arabian religion, Himyarite king of Yemen; ruled Yemen 390–420 CE
Dhu Nuwas, king of Yemen, from a Mideastern religion
Kingdom of Semien, Ethiopia, 4th century
Multiple Berber tribes noted by Ibn Khaldun, including the Jarawa, and possibly the warrior queen Kahina and her tribe. Northwest Africa, 7th century, disputed
Banu Qurayza and Banu Nadir: Arab tribes who converted to Judaism when Jews arrived in Hejaz following the Diaspora Revolt. Later, they claimed to be Israelites. They were of Arabian origins and believed in the concept of "sons of God" from pre-Islamic Arabia and indigenous polytheistic beliefs.


=== Converted nations, groups or tribes from Christianity ===
Abayudaya
Bnei Menashe
Bene Ephraim, claim to be Jews who converted to Christianity, then converted back to Judaism
B'nai Moshe (Inca Jews)
Falash Mura
Jews of San Nicandro
Subbotniks


== Converted individuals ==


=== From Christianity ===


==== Former Christian clergy or theologians ====
Robert de Reddinge (converted c. 1275)
Abba Sabra, fifteenth-century Ethiopian Orthodox monk who joined the Beta Israel (Ethiopian Jewish) community. He converted his pupil, prince Abba Saga, to Judaism and introduced monasticism to Ethiopian Jewry.
Nicolas Antoine, former Protestant theologian
William G. Dever, a biblical archaeologist and former evangelical minister who became a Hebrew Bible scholar and converted to Reform Judaism, though he now identifies with secular humanism and irreligious nontheism.
Géza Vermes, world-renowned historical Jesus research scholar, Hebraist and historian of religion, best known for being an eminent translator of the Dead Sea Scrolls; a former Roman Catholic priest of Jewish descent, he rediscovered his Jewish roots, abandoned Christianity and converted to Liberal Judaism.
Ahuva Gray, former Protestant minister
Asher Wade, former Methodist minister
Ole Brunell, converted with his family to Orthodox Judaism, moved to Israel and changed his name to Shlomo Brunell, former Lutheran minister.


==== Other Christians who converted to Judaism ====

Abba Saga, Ethiopian prince and son of emperor Zara Yaqob, who persecuted Jews; converted with his teacher Abba Sabra, a former Ethiopian Orthodox monk
Abraham ben Abraham, convert from the Potocki family, known as Ger Tzedek
Abraham of Augsburg
John Adler, American politician
Aluizio Abranches, Brazilian filmmaker
Anouk Aimée, French actress
Amar'e Stoudemire, American and Israeli basketball player
Aquila of Sinope, Bible translator
Art Aragon, Mexican-American boxer
Curtis Armstrong, American actor
Tom Arnold, American actor
Rafael Cansinos Assens, Spanish poet, essayist, literary critic and translator
Moses ben Avraham Avinu
Carroll Baker, American actress
Anne Beatts, American comedy writer
Antonia Bennett, American singer
Polly Bergen, American actress and singer
Nissim Black, rapper
Darrell Blocker, "The Spy Whisperer," CIA agent, converted to conservative Judaism in 2017.
Dany Boon, French comedian
Elizabeth Brewster, Canadian poet
May Britt, actress
Geraldine Brooks, Pulitzer Prize-winning Australian-American journalist and author
Campbell Brown, American television news reporter (Baptist Roman Catholic)
Ken Burgess, British musician
Anne Buydens, German-American producer, wife of Kirk Douglas
Yisrael Campbell, comedian (lapsed Roman Catholic)
Kate Capshaw, actress (ex-Methodist)
Nell Carter, singer and actress
Marvin Casey, Israeli-American hip hop dancer, choreographer, dance instructor and actor
Mr. Catra, Brazilian funk singer and actor
Elizabeth Jane Caulfield, linguist and musician
Lauren Cohan, American actress 
Catherine Coulson, actress
Warder Cresson, politician
Jim Croce, singer-songwriter
William Holmes Crosby Jr., physician, considered one of the founders of modern hematology
Sammy Davis Jr., entertainer
Zooey Deschanel, actress, singer, entrepreneur
Natalie Dessay, French soprano
Jacqueline du Pré, cellist
Stephen J. Dubner, American journalist, author, and podcast host
Dubrovin Stanislav
Patricia Duff, political activist and United States Democratic Party fundraiser
Miss Elizabeth, also known as Elizabeth Ann Hulette, U.S. professional wrestling manager
Hank Eng, Chinese-American politician
Carlos Escudé, Argentine political scientist and author
Rachel Factor, American Orthodox Jewish singer, actress, and dancer
Nachman Fahrner, contemporary Jewish singer
Louis Ferrante, American mobster
Kate Fischer, Australian-American former model and actress
Ada Fisher, American physician and political candidate
Isla Fisher, model and actress (ex-Methodist)
Mike Flanagan, Irish-Israeli soldier
Luke Ford, journalist
Maureen Forrester, Canadian opera singer
Erin Foster, American writer, performer and entrepreneur
Paula Fredriksen, former Catholic, historian of religion
Aaron Freeman, journalist and comedian (lapsed Roman Catholic)
Maja Ruth Frenkel, Croatian entrepreneur
Capers Funnye (ex-Methodist), rabbi
Steve Furness, American football player
Natan Gamedze, former Protestant, linguist and a Swazi royal, now a black Haredi rabbi
Scott Glenn, American actor
Albert Goldsmid, British officer, founder of the Jewish Lads' Brigade and the Maccabaeans
Lord George Gordon, nobleman and politician
Reuben Greenberg, police chief of Charleston, South Carolina
Lars Gustafsson, Swedish professor of philosophy at the University of Texas
Daryl Hall, American musician
Mary Hart (born 1950), American television personality, long-time host of the entertainment program Entertainment Tonight
Morris Hatalsky, American professional golfer
Anthony Heald, American actor
Alma Hernandez, Democratic Member of the Arizona House of Representatives
Henry Hill, American mobster
Carolivia Herron, writer of children's and adult literature
Monica Horan, actress
Joel Horlen, American baseball player
James Newton Howard, composer, conductor, and record producer
Martha Hyer, actress
Jenna Jameson, adult entertainer and entrepreneur
Carolyn Jones, actress
Thomas Jones (lapsed Roman Catholic)
Y-Love a/k/a Yitz Jordan, musician
Jon Juaristi, Spanish writer
Skip Jutze, American major league baseball player
Semei Kakungulu
Walter Kaufmann, German-American philosopher, translator and poet
Carol Kaye, American musician
Felicity Kendal, British actress
Cameron Kerry, politician, brother of John Kerry (lapsed Roman Catholic)
Jamaica Kincaid, author
John King, American television journalist (lapsed Roman Catholic)
Karlie Kloss, model
Fumiko Kometani, Japanese author and painter
Mathilde Krim, Ph.D., founding Chairman of amfAR, association for AIDS research
Anthony Lake, American diplomat, political figure, and academic
Frida Laski, British suffragist, birth control advocate, and eugenicist
Nahida Lazarus, German author, essayist, scholar, and literary critic
Natasha Leggero, American actress and comedian
John Lehr, American film and television actor and comedian
Julius Lester, son of a Methodist minister and a children's author (ex-Methodist)
Joan Lunden, American journalist, author and television host
Ernst von Manstein, army officer and teacher
Elliott Maddox, American former Major League Baseball player
Richard Marceau, Canadian politician
Sam McCullum (born 1952), NFL football wide receiver
Charles McDew (1938–2018), African-American activist of the Civil Rights Movement.
Anne Meara (1929–2015), American comedian and actress, partner and wife of Jerry Stiller (lapsed Roman Catholic)
Adah Isaacs Menken, stage actress
LaVon Mercer (born 1959), American-Israeli basketball player
Anastassia Michaeli, Russian-born former member of the Israeli Knesset
Benjamin Millepied, French dancer and choreographer
Santa Montefiore, novelist
Sara Jane Moore, American woman who attempted to assassinate U.S. president Gerald Ford in 1975
Tommy Mottola, American record producer
Françoise Mouly, French artist, designer, and art editor of The New Yorker
Jeff Newman, American Major League Baseball catcher
Bob Nystrom, Canadian former NHL player
Arieh O'Sullivan, American-born Israeli journalist
Morgan Ortagus, American television commentator, financial analyst, and political advisor
Eleanor Parker, American actress
Lorna Patterson, American film, stage and television actress
Andrew Percy, British politician
Alison Pick, Canadian novelist and poet
Rebecca Pidgeon, Scottish-American actress, singer-songwriter
Bob Plager, Canadian retired professional NHL ice hockey defenceman
Moses Prado, professor of the classic languages at the University of Marburg
Marge Redmond, actress
Roger Rees, actor
Reuel Abraham, German pilot in Hitler's army, then became a Jew and citizen of Israel
Mandy Rice-Davies, British model and showgirl
Sofia Richie. American model and media personality
Michael Ross, Canadian intelligence expert, former Mossad officer
Mary Doria Russell, American author (lapsed Roman Catholic)
Jackie Sandler, American actress
Bärbel Schäfer, German television presenter and talk show host
Mary Schaps, Israeli-American mathematical scholar
Laura Schlessinger, American radio personality
Norma Shearer, American actress
Joseph J. Sherman, businessman
Cate Shortland, Australian director
Shyne, Belizean–American rapper
Karol Sidon, Czech Orthodox rabbi, writer and playwright
Daniel Silva, American author of thriller and espionage novels
Chris Smith, American-Israeli basketball player
Willie "the Lion" Smith, American pianist and composer
Robin Spark, Scottish artist.
June Squibb, American actress
Kim Stanley, American actress
Venetia Stanley, socialite
Joseph Abraham Steblicki (lapsed Roman Catholic)
Margo Stilley, American film actress
Annette Taddeo, businesswoman and politician
Elizabeth Taylor, actress (ex-Christian Scientist)
Karen Tintori, American author of fiction and nonfiction (lapsed Roman Catholic)
Andre Bernard Tippett, American Hall of Fame former football linebacker for the New England Patriots (ex-Baptist)
Jacob Tirado (c. 1540–1620), co-founder of the Sephardic community of Amsterdam
Ivanka Trump, businesswoman, raised Presbyterian
Bob Tufts (1955–2019), American former Major League Baseball pitcher
Ike Turner, American musician, bandleader, talent scout, and record producer; son of a Baptist minister
Jeff Tweedy, American musician
Michael W. Twitty, American writer, culinary historian and educator
Alex Tyus, American-Israeli professional basketball player
Chris Van Allsburg, children's writer
Conrad Veidt, German actor
Jackie Wilson, American soul singer
Mare Winningham, actress, singer (lapsed Roman Catholic)
Katarzyna Weiglowa, Polish martyr
Steve Yeager, American baseball player
Nikki Ziering, model


=== Not from Christianity ===


==== From atheism and/or agnosticism ====
Christian B. Anfinsen – Nobel prize-winning chemist (Orthodox Judaism)
David P. Goldman, "Spengler" – columnist and former member of the LaRouche movement who embraced Judaism in the 1990s
Will Herberg – social philosopher and sociologist of religion; Jewish theologian; former atheist and Marxist of Jewish ancestry who was raised atheist
Benny Lévy – philosopher; last personal secretary of Jean-Paul Sartre
Suzy Menkes – fashion journalist
Hilary Putnam – philosopher raised in a Jewish-atheist home
Mary Doria Russell
Anna Silk – Canadian actress
David Wolpe – a leading rabbi in Conservative Judaism; former atheist


==== From Black Hebrew Israelitism ====
Eddie Butler – Israeli singer, converted to Orthodox Judaism
Capers Funnye


==== From Islam ====
Avraham Sinai – Lebanese member of Hezbollah who had an Orthodox conversion and lives as a Haredi Jew in Tsfat.
Baruch Mizrahi – Palestinian Arab and member of the Irgun.
Dario Hunter – American lawyer, rabbi and politician.
Ibrahim Shaheen and Inshirah Moussa – Palestinian man and his Egyptian wife.
Ibtisam Hamid, a Kuwaiti singer better known as Basma Al-Kuwaiti converted to Judaism, claiming it was more tolerant of women's rights.
Michaela DePrince – Sierra Leonean-American ballet dancer.
Nasreen Qadri – Arab Israeli singer.
Nissim Baruch Black (born Damian Jamohl Black) – American rapper and music producer, raised Muslim but converted to Christianity before converting to Judaism.
Khadija Patman – British pornographic actress of South Asian origin. She converted to Judaism while dating her Jewish boyfriend.


==== From other Middle Eastern religions ====
Avtalyon, Sage and vice-president of the Sanhedrin, apparently from a Mideastern religion
Sh'maya, Sage and President of the Sanhedrin, apparently from a Mideastern religion


==== From Greco-Roman religion ====
Aquila of Sinope (Acylas), from traditional Greek religion
Paulina Beturia, from traditional Roman religion
Flavia Domitilla, from traditional ancient Roman religion (possibly to Jewish Christianity, as she is also a Christian saint)
Titus Flavius Clemens, consul, great-nephew of the Roman Emperor Vespasian, from traditional Roman religion (possibly to Jewish Christianity, as he is also a Christian saint)
Fulvia, wife of Emperor Tiberius' close friend, Saturninus, from traditional Roman religion
Onkelos, Hebrew scholar and translator, from ancient Roman religion


==== From Samaritanism ====
Sofi Tsedaka, Israeli actress, singer, television presenter and politician


==== From Shinto ====
Setsuzo Kotsuji, son of a Shinto priest, and a professor in Japan (converted from Shinto to Christianity and then from Christianity to Judaism)


==== From Hinduism ====
Sarah Avraham, women's world Thai-boxing champion


==== From Buddhism ====
Angela Warnick Buchdahl, American Reform Jewish Rabbi, converted to Orthodox Judaism at age 21. She was not raised within the Buddhist faith; however, her mother is Buddhist so by Orthodox Jewish law she was not considered Jewish, but she was raised Jewish and so by Reform Jewish law she has always been Jewish.


==== List of conversions named in the Bible ====
Bithiah, from traditional Egyptian religion
Darius the Mede, from a mideastern religion who admitted that God of Israel is eternal Forever 
Jethro, priest of Midian and father-in-law of Moses, from a Mideastern religion
Makeda, queen of Sheba, from a Mideastern or Ethiopian religion
Osenath, from the ancient Egyptian religion (her name relates to Anat)
Ruth, great-grandmother of King David, from a Near Eastern religion
Yael, from Canaanite or another Near Eastern religion
Zipporah, from a Mideastern or northern African religion


=== Undetermined former religion ===
According to rabbinic tradition, Obadiah the prophet, from a Mideastern religion
Drew Bundini Brown, assistant trainer of former heavyweight boxing champion Muhammad Ali
Sarah Brown, actress
Salem Shaloam David
József Eisenhoffer
Nachman Fahrner
Lenny Kuhr, Dutch singer-songwriter
Martha Nussbaum, American philosopher and academic
Annamie Paul, Canadian activist, lawyer, and former leader of the Green Party of Canada.
Helen Reddy, Australian American singer and actress
Dara Torres
Schlomo Hofmeister
Desmond Wilcox
Andre Williams


=== Converts who later left the faith ===
Cristian Castro, Grammy Award-nominated Mexican pop singer (reverted to Roman Catholicism after divorcing his Jewish wife) 
Bob Denard, French soldier and mercenary. Converted from Catholicism to Judaism, then from Judaism to Islam, then from Islam to Catholicism
Polemon II, king of Cilicia, converted to marry the Jewish princess Berenice; later relapsed


== See also ==
List of people by belief
List of Jews
List of converts to Buddhism
List of converts to Christianity
List of people who converted to Catholicism
List of converts to Hinduism
List of converts to Islam
List of converts to Sikhism


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Hill, Andrew E. (2009). "Daniel-Malachi". In Longman, Tremper; Garland, David E. (eds.). The Expositor's Bible Commentary. Vol. 8. Zondervan. ISBN 9780310590545.
Seow, C.L. (2003). Daniel. Westminster John Knox Press. ISBN 9780664256753.