This is an incomplete list of Catholic priests. 


== Roman & Eastern Catholic Church ==
Piero Folli – Italian antifascist parish priest
Joseph Freinademetz – Missionary to China, canonized
Mariano Gagnon – Franciscan friar and author who helped indigenous people resist the Shining Path in Peru
Georg Gänswein – Secretary to Pope Benedict XVI
Augustine Geve – Solomon Islands Catholic priest and politician, murdered in 2002
Lionel Groulx – French Canadian Nationalist
Jacques Hamel – Priest killed in the 2016 Normandy church attack.
Ignatius of Loyola – Founder of the Society of Jesus
Saint Arnold Janssen – Missionary
Marcelline Jayakody, Sri Lankan Sinhala author, composer of hymns, author, journalist
Francis Kilcoyne (died 1985) – President of Brooklyn College
Georges-Henri Lévesque – Sociologist
Gerard Timoner III – The current master of the Dominican Order
Eustáquio van Lieshout – Missionary in Brazil
Michael J. McGivney – Founder of the Knights of Columbus
Claudio Monteverdi – Italian composer
Columba Murphy – Involved in gaining an Edict of Toleration for Hawaiian Catholics
Nemesi Marqués Oste – Rector in Andorra and political figure there
William Pope – One of John Henry Newman's converts: seceded from Anglicanism to the Church of Rome in 1853
Jean-Baptiste de La Salle – A founder of the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools
Mihalj Šilobod Bolšić – Roman Catholic priest, mathematician, writer, and musical theorist primarily known for writing the first Croatian arithmetic textbook Arithmatika Horvatzka (published in Zagreb, 1758)
David Michael Moses – American priest and musician
Thomas Joseph White – American priest and bluegrass musician.
Ghevont Alishan – Priest of the Armenian Catholic Church who designed Armenia's first modern flag.

Ed Evanko – Actor who became a Ukrainian Catholic priest.
Louis Massignon – Scholar of Islam who transferred to the Melkite Greek Catholic Church after converting to Catholicism and later became a priest.
Alphonse Mingana – Chaldean Catholic Church priest and Orientalist.
Alphonse Mingana – Chaldean Catholic Church priest and Orientalist.


== Catholic exorcists ==
Father Ernst Alt
Father Candido Amantini
Gabriele Amorth – Founder of the International Association of Exorcists
Father Raymond J. Bishop
William S. Bowdern – Participated in an exorcism of Roland Doe in 1949. The incident became the basis of William Peter Blatty's novel The Exorcist.
Jeremy Davies
Father Angelo Fantoni
Father Jose Antonio Fortea
Giancarlo Gramolazzo – President of the International Association of Exorcists until his death in 2010
Father Alfred Kunz
Father Matteo La Grua
James J. LeBar – New York exorcist consulted with regards to films
Malachi Martin – Writer on unusual subjects as well as an exorcist
Father Theophilus Riesinger
Father Rosario Stroscio


== See also ==
Lists of Roman Catholics


== References ==


== External links ==
Catholic priests weblink
Catholic hierarchy.org
Search Catholic Priests Online