Major Whirlwind or (Russian: Майор  Вихрь, romanized: Mayor  Vikhr) is a 1967 television film directed by Yevgeny Tashkov and based on the novel by Yulian Semyonov. The main character, Major Whirlwind, is inspired by Aleksey Nikolayevich Botyan.


== Plot ==
Summer 1944. In impotent rage before impending disaster, management of the SS with the support of Hitler undertakes a special program of extermination of Slavic cultural capitals. Kraków, Bratislava, Prague   all these cities must be mined and razed to the ground with explosions.  The Soviet command sends a special group of Major Whirlwind  into occupied Kraków, consisting of three people, whose aim is to prevent the destruction of the city. The release of the group is unsuccessful,  Whirlwind  gets shipped to the Gestapo, but later he manages to escape.
Agents start to take action. The Polish underground collects valuable information about the German troops in Kraków, and radio operator  Anya transmits them to the Soviet command. However, during one of radio transmissions, location of the transmitter is traced, and  Anya   is arrested by the Abwehr. Abwehr Colonel Berg in conjunction with the Gestapo holds an operation for recruiting  Anya  for the subsequent radio play. He tells the radio operator that supposedly he is ready to cooperate with the Soviet intelligence and pass important information on to them. Berg manages to convince  Anya  and she even sends coded disinformation prepared by the Gestapo. However, after the arrest of his chief Admiral Canaris in connection with the 20 July plot, Colonel Berg decides to establish genuine contact with the Soviet intelligence. He meets with  Whirlwind  and organizes  Anya's  escape.
With Berg's group,  Whirlwind  gets information about the specific organizers of the Kraków explosion. Attempting to influence the Chief Executive of the act,   SS officer Libo, is a failure. However,  Whirlwind  manages to capture engineer Krauch, who when saving his own life, draws a diagram of the Kraków explosion network. In the last hours before the destruction of the city,  Whirlwind  and the Polish underground find the main cable, blow it up and fiercely defend the place of the explosion. Brave heroes die, German soldiers are already prepared to repair the damaged cable, but Soviet tanks are not far away and the Nazis flee.


== Cast ==
Vadim Beroev as Major Whirlwind
Anastasia Voznesenskaya as Anya, radio operator
Viktor Pavlov    as Kolya, Whirlwind's deputy
Alexander Schirvindt as Jozef, Polish underground fighter
Yevgeny Teterin as  Sedoi, Polish underground fighter
Lyudmila Davydova as Krysya, Polish underground fighter
Igor Yasulovich as Kurt Appel, German soldier-driver, Krysya's groom
Yevgeni Burenkov as Borodin, soviet intelligence colonel
Yuri Volyntsev as Hugo Shwalb, Gestapo officer
Vladimir Kenigson as Traub, German military journalist
Vladislav Strzhelchik as Berg, Abwehr colonel
Yevgeniy Kuznetsov as Friedrich-Wilhelm Krüger, SD chief of Kraków
Vladimir Gusev as Mukha, traitor
Oleg Golubitsky as interpreter
Georgi Shevtsov as Stromberg, Wehrmacht major
Konstantin Zheldin as Gestapo officer, Kolya's  who questioned
Boris Bibikov as Neubutt, Wehrmacht colonel-general
Vladimir Osenev as Krauch, German colonel-engineer
Peeter Kard as Gustav Libo, SS Obersturmbannführer
Vladimir Pitsek as hairdresser
Sergei Golovanov as Birghoff, Wehrmacht officer
Valentin Golubenko as Gestapo officer
Valentina Sharykina as girl dancing at the restaurant
Aleksandra Denisova as old Polish woman
Alevtina Rumyantseva as waitress
Victor Filippov as Polish partisan


== See also ==
Seventeen Moments of Spring


== References ==


== External links ==
Major Whirlwind at IMDb