Ross John Greer (born 1994 or 1995) is a Scottish politician who has served as Co-Leader of the Scottish Greens since August 2025. He also been a Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) for the West Scotland region since 2016. A member of the Scottish Greens, he was the youngest MSP elected in the 2016 election.


== Early life and career ==
Greer was educated at Bearsden Academy, leaving in 2012. Greer was a member of the Scottish Youth Parliament, representing the Clydebank and Milngavie constituency 2011–13. Greer joined the Scottish Greens at the age of 15.  He took part in the Debating Matters competition in 2012, where he reached the national final.
Greer studied politics and psychology "for a time" at Strathclyde University, but abandoned his studies in December 2012 after being recruited by Yes Scotland to be their communities co-ordinator for the forthcoming Scottish independence referendum. Following the referendum, Greer was employed by the Scottish Greens in a role involving campaigns communications and fundraising.


== Political career ==

Greer stood as the Scottish Green candidate in the East Dunbartonshire constituency in the 2015 general election, securing 5th place with 804 votes (1.5%). He became the Scottish Greens' party spokesman on Europe and external affairs. In March 2015, the Scottish Greens announced Greer had been selected as the lead candidate for their West Scotland regional list, following a ballot of their members.


=== Member of the Scottish Parliament ===
Ahead of the 2016 Scottish Parliament election, Greer was critical that the general level of engagement with 16 and 17-year-olds as first-time voters had been below what was seen in the referendum. On 6 May 2016, he was elected with 17,218 votes (5.3%) as an additional member for the West Scotland region. Elected at the age of 21 years old, he became Scotland's youngest MSP. Before Greer was elected, the youngest MSP had previously been Labour's Mark Griffin, who was 25 years old when he was first elected in 2011. On 22 May, he was appointed the Scottish Greens' spokesperson for International Development and External Affairs, Education and Skills, and Culture and Media.
Like his Green colleagues, Greer is opposed to an independent Scotland joining NATO. He told the Daily Record:

NATO is a 'first strike' nuclear alliance, meaning it claims the right to launch its weapons of mass slaughter against other countries without having been attacked first. There can never, ever be justification for murdering millions of innocent people like that. For this reason alone, never mind NATO's history of provoking rather than avoiding conflict, the Scottish Greens are clear that an independent Scotland should follow Ireland's lead and stay out. Instead, we should immediately sign the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which would not only make the Trident submarines at Faslane illegal and force their removal, it would also show that we refuse to let others use weapons of mass destruction on our behalf.In 2019, Greer was strongly criticised for having posted a tweet, while a secondary school student, in June 2012 which read "I'm not exaggerating when I say nothing would thrill me more than for Buckingham Palace to burn to the ground."
On 25 January 2019, Greer posted a tweet calling Winston Churchill "a white supremacist mass murderer." He later went on Good Morning Britain and Politics Live and was challenged on his views. This was not the first time Greer has been criticised for his comments about the Second World War; a few years prior he was criticised in The Sun after tweeting that "Imperial Britain was happy to live with Hitler" in reference to the policy of Appeasement.
In 2021, amid the COVID-19 pandemic, Greer violated local restrictions by visiting a pub in Edinburgh along with party co-leaders Lorna Slater and Patrick Harvie and a fourth person.


=== Scottish Green Co-Leadership ===
In July 2025, Greer announced  he was running for Co-leadership of the Scottish Greens. During the campaign, he claimed to have been hospitalised twice due to "bullying" within the party. On August 29, 2025, the party announced that Greer had won the leadership contest, along with his fellow MSP Gillian Mackay.


== Personal life ==
Greer is a member of the Church of Scotland.
Greer is gay, as confirmed during a Scottish Parliament debate about his opposition to the appointment of Kate Forbes as Deputy First Minister of Scotland.


== References ==


== External links ==

Scottish Parliament profiles of MSPs: Ross Greer
Profile on the Scottish Greens website