The Russian-occupied territories of Ukraine are areas of southern and eastern Ukraine that are controlled by Russia as a result of the Russo-Ukrainian War and the ongoing invasion. In Ukrainian law, they are defined as the "temporarily occupied territories". As of 2024, Russia occupies almost 20% of Ukraine and about 3 to 3.5 million Ukrainians are estimated to be living under occupation; since the invasion, the occupied territories lost roughly half of their population. The United Nations Human Rights Office reports that Russia is committing severe human rights violations in occupied Ukraine, including arbitrary detentions, enforced disappearances, torture, crackdown on peaceful protest and freedom of speech, enforced Russification, passportization, indoctrination of children, and suppression of Ukrainian language and culture.
The occupation began in 2014 with Russia's invasion and annexation of Crimea, and its de facto takeover of Ukraine's Donbas during a war in eastern Ukraine. In 2022, Russia launched a full-scale invasion. However, due to fierce Ukrainian resistance and logistical challenges (e.g. the stalled Russian Kyiv convoy), the Russian Armed Forces retreated from northern Ukraine in early April. In September 2022, Ukrainian forces launched the Kharkiv counteroffensive and liberated most of that oblast. Another southern counteroffensive resulted in the liberation of Kherson that November.
On 30 September 2022, Russia announced the annexation of Donetsk, Luhansk, Zaporizhzhia and Kherson oblasts, despite only occupying part of the claimed territory. The UN General Assembly passed a resolution rejecting this annexation as illegal and upholding Ukraine's right to territorial integrity.
As of 2024, Ukraine's peace terms call for Russian forces to leave the occupied territories. Russia's terms call for it to keep all the land it occupies, and be given all of the oblasts that it claims but does not fully control. Several Western-based analysts say that allowing Russia to keep the land it seized would "reward the aggressor while punishing the victim" and encourage further Russian expansionism.


== Background ==

With the Euromaidan and Revolution of Dignity since November 2013, popular protests across Ukraine led to the dismissal of pro-Russian Ukrainian president Viktor Yanukovych by the Verkhovna Rada (Ukraine's parliament), as he fled to Russia. The growing pro-European sentiment at the center of this period of upheaval caused unease in the Kremlin, and Russian president Vladimir Putin immediately mobilized Russian army and airborne forces to invade Crimea, and they swiftly took control of major government buildings and blockaded the Ukrainian military in their bases across the peninsula. Soon after, Russian-installed officials announced and carried out a referendum for the region to join Russia, which western and independent organizations labeled as illegitimate. The Kremlin rejected these claims and soon officially annexed Crimea into Russia, with western nations issuing sanctions against Russia in response. In addition, with pro-Russian counter-protests across Eastern and Southern Ukraine in response to the ousting of Yanukovych, Russia allegedly supported Russian and pro-Russian militant separatists in the Donbas region in taking control of major government buildings. These separatists eventually created the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republics, and have since been at conflict with the now-pro-European Ukrainian government, known as the war in Donbas (Russia announced their "annexation" after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine).
In response to Russian military intervention, the Parliament of Ukraine adopted government laws (with further updates and extensions) to qualify the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and parts of Donetsk and Luhansk regions as temporarily occupied and uncontrolled territories:

Autonomous Republic of Crimea:
Law of Ukraine No. 1207-VII (15 April 2014) "Assurance of Citizens' Rights and Freedom, and Legal Regulations on Temporarily Occupied Territory of Ukraine".
Separate Raions of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts:
Order of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine No. 1085-р (7 November 2014) "A List of Settlements on Territory Temporarily Uncontrolled by Government Authorities, and a List of Landmarks Located at the Contact Line".
Law of Ukraine No. 254-19-VIII (17 March 2015) "On Recognition of Separate Raions, Cities, Towns and Villages in Donetsk and Luhansk Regions as Temporarily Occupied Territories".
Petro Poroshenko, one of the opposition leaders during Euromaidan, won a landslide victory in the election to succeed interim president Turchynov, three months after the ousting of Yanukovych.


== Current overview ==


== Timeline ==
The following chart summarizes some estimates of the total area of Ukrainian territory under Russian control, presented by various publishers at different instances during the conflict. Note that some of the estimates from the end of 2022 were conflicting.


== Before February 2022 ==
Since Russia annexed Crimea in March 2014, it administers the peninsula under two federal subjects: the Republic of Crimea and the federal city of Sevastopol. Ukraine continues to claim the peninsula as an integral part of its territory, which is supported by most foreign governments through the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 68/262, even though Russia and some other UN member states have expressed support for the 2014 Crimean referendum, implying recognition of Crimea as part of the Russian Federation. In 2015, the Ukrainian parliament officially set 20 February 2014 as the date of "the beginning of the temporary occupation of Crimea and Sevastopol by Russia".
The uncontrolled portions of the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts are commonly abbreviated as "ORDLO" from Ukrainian, especially among Ukrainian news media. ("certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts", Ukrainian: Окремі райони Донецької та Луганської областей, romanized: Okremi raiony Donetskoi ta Luhanskoi oblastei) The term first appeared in Law of Ukraine No.1680-VII (October 2014). Documents of the Minsk Protocol and the OSCE refer to them as "certain areas of Donetsk and Luhansk regions" (CADLR) of Ukraine.
The Ministry of Reintegration of Temporarily Occupied Territories is the Ukrainian government ministry that oversees government policy towards the regions. As of 2019, the government considered 7% of Ukraine's territory to be under occupation. The United Nations General Assembly resolution 73/194, adopted on 17 December 2018, designated Crimea as under "temporary occupation".
The Ukrainian army was concerned in 2019 about the deployment of 3M-54 Kalibr cruise missiles on Russian naval and coast guard vessels operating in the Sea of Azov, which is adjacent to the temporarily occupied territories. As a result, Mariupol and Berdiansk, two main Pryazovian seaports, suffer from an increase in insecurity (both cities were captured in 2022).
Temryuk and Taganrog, two other ports on the Sea of Azov, have allegedly been used to disguise the provenance of anthracite coal and liquefied natural gas (LNG) from the temporarily occupied territories.


=== Territories affected ===

Since the start of the Russo-Ukrainian War in 2014, the Government of Ukraine is issuing (as extension to government order no. 1085-р and law no. 254-VIII) up-to-date "List of Temporarily Occupied Regions and Settlements" and a "List of Landmarks Bordering the Anti-Terrorist Operation Zone". As of 16 September 2020, the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine has made four updates to order no. 1085-р and law no. 254-VIII:

Addendum No. 128-р as of 18 February 2015
Addendum No. 428-р as of 5 May 2015
Addendum No. 1276-р as of 2 December 2015
Addendum No. 79-р as of 7 February 2018
Addendum No. 410-р as of 13 June 2018
Addendum No. 505-р as of 5 July 2019
Addendum No. 1125-р as of 16 September 2020
Some settlements' names are the result of 2016 Decommunization in Ukraine.
The list below is based on the extension as of 7 February 2018. The borders of some raions have changed since 2015.

Autonomous Republic of Crimea (entire region)
Donetsk Oblast
Cities of regional importance and nearby settlements:
Donetsk
Horlivka
Debaltseve
Dokuchaievsk
Yenakiieve
Zhdanivka
Khrestivka
Makiivka
Snizhne
Chystiakove
Khartsyzk
Shakhtarsk
Ridkodub
Yasynuvata
Amvrosiivka Raion (all settlements)
Bakhmut Raion:
Bulavynske
Vuhlehirsk
Oleksandrivske
Olenivka
Vesela Dolyna
Danylove
Illinka
Kamianka
Bulavyne
Hrozne
Kaiutyne
Vozdvyzhenka
Stupakove
Savelivka
Debaltsivske
Kalynivka
Lohvynove
Novohryhorivka
Nyzhnie Lozove
Sanzharivka
Olkhovatka
Pryberezhne
Dolomitne
Travneve
Lozove
Volnovakha Raion:
Andriivka
Dolia
Liubivka
Malynove
Molodizhne
Novomykolaivka
Nova Olenivka
Petrivske
Chervone
Pikuzy
Mariinka Raion:
Kreminets
Luhanske
Oleksandrivka
Staromykhailivka
Syhnalne
Novoazovsk Raion (all settlements)
Starobesheve Raion (all settlements)
Boikivske Raion (all settlements)
Shakhtarsk Raion (all settlements)
Yasynuvata Raion:
Vesele
Bétmanove
Mineralne
Spartak
Yakovlivka
Kruta Balka
Kashtanove
Lozove
Vasylivka
Luhansk Oblast
Cities of regional importance and nearby settlements:
Luhansk
Alchevsk
Antratsyt
Brianka
Holubivka
Khrustalnyi
Sorokyne
Pervomaisk (known as Oleksandrivka)
Rovenky
Dovzhansk
Kadiivka
Antratsyt Raion (all settlements)
Sorokyne Raion (all settlements)
Lutuhyne Raion (all settlements)
Novoaidar Raion:
Sokilnyky
Perevalsk Raion (all settlements)
Popasna Raion:
Berezivske
Holubivske
Zholobok
Kalynove
Kalynove-Borshchuvate
Kruhlyk
Molodizhne
Mius
Novooleksandrivka
Chornukhyne
Zolote (except Zolote-1,2,3,4)
Dovzhánsk Raion (all settlements)
Slovianoserbsk Raion (all settlements)
Stanytsia Luhanska Raion:
Burchak-Mykhailivka
Lobacheve
Mykolaivka
Sukhodil
Sevastopol (entire city)


== Since the 2022 invasion ==

After Russia's full-scale invasion in February 2022, the Russian military and Russian proxy forces further occupied additional Ukrainian territory. By early April, Russian forces withdrew from Northern Ukraine, including the capital Kyiv, after stagnating progress amid fierce Ukrainian resistance in order to focus on consolidating control over Eastern and Southern Ukraine. On June 2, 2022, Zelenskyy announced that Russia occupied approximately 20% of Ukrainian territory.
Before 2022, Russia occupied 42,000 km2 (16,000 sq mi) of Ukrainian territory (Crimea, and parts of Donetsk and Luhansk), and occupied a further 119,000 km2 (46,000 sq mi) after its full-scale invasion by March 2022, a total of 161,000 km2 (62,000 sq mi) or almost 27% of Ukraine. By 11 November 2022, the Institute for the Study of War calculated that Ukrainian forces had liberated an area of 74,443 km2 (28,743 sq mi) from Russian occupation, leaving Russia with control of about 18% of Ukraine. During the whole of 2023, Russian forces captured an estimated net 487 km2 (188 sq mi) of Ukrainian territory.
In 2024, Russian forces captured an estimated 4,168 km2 (1,609 sq mi) in both Ukraine and Russia's Kursk Oblast, where Ukraine had previously launched a cross-border offensive. The majority of the Russian advances took place in the months of September, October, and November 2024.
As of 2024, Ukraine's peace terms include Russia withdrawing its troops from the occupied territories. Russia's terms include Russia keeping all the land it occupies, and being given all of the oblasts that it claims but does not fully control.
Several Western-based analysts say that allowing Russia to keep the land it seized would "reward the aggressor while punishing the victim" and set a dangerous precedent. They predict that this would encourage Russia "to continue its imperialist campaign of expansionism" against Ukraine and its other neighbors, and embolden other expansionist regimes. Zelenskyy commented: "It's the same thing Hitler did, when he said 'give me a part of Czechoslovakia and it'll end here'." Leo Litra of the European Council on Foreign Relations pointed out that allowing Russia to annex Crimea in 2014 did not stop further Russian aggression. Opinion polls show that the majority of Ukrainians oppose giving up any of their country for peace.


=== Kharkiv Oblast ===

The occupation began on February 24, 2022, immediately after Russian troops invaded Ukraine and began seizing parts of the Kharkiv Oblast. Since April, Russian forces tried to consolidate control in the region and capture the major city of Kharkiv after their withdrawal from Northern Ukraine. However, by mid-May, the Ukrainian forces pushed the Russians back towards the periphery of the Russian border, indicating that Ukrainians continue to garner stiff resistance against Russian advances. In early September 2022, Ukrainian forces began a major counteroffensive and by 11 September 2022, Russia had retreated from most of the settlements it previously occupied in the oblast, and the Russian Ministry of Defense announced a formal withdrawal of Russian forces from nearly all of Kharkiv Oblast stating that an "operation to curtail and transfer troops" was underway."


=== Kherson Oblast ===

On February 24, 2022, Russian troops from Crimea invaded Henichesk and Skadovsk Raions. During the first days of the offensive, the Russians surrounded most of the cities and towns in the oblast, blocking the entrances to them with roadblocks, but not entering the cities themselves. Significant battles were fought for the Antonivskyi Bridge, which crosses the Dnipro River between Russian positions on the South bank and the Ukrainian city of Kherson on the North bank. The Russian military's overwhelming firepower forced the Ukrainian forces to retreat, and the city fell to Russian control on March 2. On June 29, the Russian occupation authorities in Kherson Oblast announced preparations for holding a referendum of annexation. On July 9, the Ukrainian government announced preparations for an imminent counteroffensive in the South, and urged the residents of occupied parts of Kherson and Zaporizhzhia Oblasts to shelter or evacuate to minimize civilian casualties in the operation. Following the destruction of the Antonivskyi Bridge and the advance of Ukrainian troops from the west, the lack of sustainable supply lines amid heavy Ukrainian shelling compelled the Russian forces to retreat. They eventually retreated from all areas on the north bank of the Dnipro River, including the city of Kherson, which the Ukrainian forces recaptured soon after, known as the liberation of Kherson.

Raions of Kherson Oblast that are occupied:

Henichesk Raion
Kakhovka Raion
Skadovsk Raion
Half of Kherson Raion


=== Zaporizhzhia Oblast ===

On February 26, 2022, the city of Berdiansk came under Russian control, followed by Melitopol on March 1 after fierce fighting between Russian and Ukrainian forces. Russian troops also besieged and captured the city of Enerhodar, where the Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant is located, which came under Russian control on March 4. Since July, there have been increased tensions around the power plant as both Russia and Ukraine accuse each other of missile strikes around the plant, causing fears of a potential repeat of the Chernobyl Disaster.
Raions of Zaporizhzhia Oblast that are occupied:

Melitopol Raion
Berdiansk Raion
Most of Vasylivka Raion
Most of Polohy Raion


=== Donetsk Oblast ===

Since the invasion, the Russian military, along with the Russian-backed Donetsk People's Republic, built on territorial gains they have made during the war in Donbas and captured additional territory, most significantly the port of Mariupol after a prolonged siege.
By February 24, 2022, the following raions of Donetsk Oblast were occupied:

Horlivka Raion
Donetsk Raion
Kalmiuske Raion
After February 24, 2022, the following raions of Donetsk Oblast were captured:

Mariupol Raion
Half of Volnovakha Raion
Portions of Bakhmut Raion, Kramatorsk Raion, and Pokrovsk Raion


=== Luhansk Oblast ===

By February 24, 2022, the following raions of Luhansk Oblast were occupied:

Alchevsk Raion
Dovzhansk Raion
Luhansk Raion
Rovenky Raion
After February 24, 2022, the following raions of Luhansk Oblast were captured:

Shchastia Raion
Staroblisk Raion
Most of Svatove Raion
Most of Sievierodonetsk Raion
On July 3, 2022, the Russian military claimed that the entire Luhansk Oblast has been "liberated", suggesting that Russian forces had succeeded in occupying the entire oblast and marked a major milestone for their goal of capturing the Donbas.
In late September, Ukraine said that Bilohorivka in Luhansk Oblast had been recaptured. By early October 2022, Ukrainian forces had recaptured several more settlements as their counteroffensive operations shifted focus into the main territory of the oblast. In September 2024, Russian forces controlled an estimated 98.5% of Luhansk Oblast.


=== Mykolaiv Oblast ===

The occupation of Mykolaiv Oblast began on February 26, 2022, with Russian troops crossing into the oblast through the Kherson Oblast from Crimea. In March, Russia attempted to advance towards Voznesensk, Mykolaiv and Nova Odesa, but were met with stiff resistance and failed. By May, Russia occupied Snihurivka, Tsentralne, Novopetrivka and numerous other small villages within the oblast. All these were retaken on 10–11 November 2022 during the Ukrainian counteroffensive, which followed the withdrawal of Russian troops from the right bank of the Dnieper.
Raions of Mykolaiv Oblast that are occupied:

Extreme southern portion of Mykolaiv Raion (Kinburn Peninsula)


=== Dnipropetrovsk Oblast ===


== Formerly occupied territories ==


=== Chernihiv Oblast ===

Russia started the occupation as part of the northern campaign in the invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. The occupying forces occupied a large part of the oblast, and eventually laid siege to the oblast capital, but failed to capture the city. Eventually, their stagnant progress led to their complete withdrawal from the oblast by early April, ending the occupation.


=== Kyiv Oblast ===

Russia started the occupation as part of the northern offensive in the invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Russian troops occupied a large part of the oblast, even approaching the borders of Kyiv city proper. However, the invaders' stagnant progress led to their failure to capture the Ukrainian capital, and eventually led to a complete withdrawal from the oblast by early April, ending the occupation.


=== Odesa Oblast ===

From 24 February to 30 June 2022, Russian forces occupied Snake Island in Odesa Oblast, but later withdrew after suffering heavy missile, artillery and drone strikes from the Ukrainian forces.


=== Poltava Oblast ===
During the battles of Lebedyn and Okhtyrka, Sumy Oblast, Russian forces spilled over and attacked Hadiach on 4 March 2022, and captured small areas around it, and advanced near Zinkiv and occupied Pirky on 3 March, but were repelled. According to Pro-Ukraine sources, they were soon afterwards repelled which was known as the "Hadiach Safari", since people used shotguns and rifles to hunt for Russian soldiers.  Some notable areas captured were Pirky and Bobryk.


=== Sumy Oblast ===

Russia started the occupation as part of the northern offensive in the invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. The Russian military occupied a large part of the oblast, but failed to take the oblast capital. Eventually, the stagnant progress of the Russian Ground Forces led to their complete withdrawal from the oblast by early April, ending the occupation.


=== Zhytomyr Oblast ===

Russia started the occupation as part of the Northern offensive in the invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. The Russians occupied a small portion of the oblast, and never attempted to capture the oblast capital. Eventually, the culmination of the drive on Kyiv led to their complete withdrawal from the oblast by early April, ending the occupation.


== Violations and war crimes ==
The United Nations Human Rights Office reports that Russia is committing severe human rights violations in occupied Ukraine. These include arbitrary detentions, torture, looting, and enforced disappearances by Russian soldiers acting with "impunity".  Peaceful protests and freedom of speech have been suppressed, while freedom of movement is severely restricted. Anyone suspected of opposing the occupation has been targeted, while people have been "encouraged to inform on one another, leaving them afraid even of their own friends and neighbours". OHCHR later found Russia guilty of enforced disppearances and torture as crimes against humanity, as well as arbitrary arrest and detention. Human Rights Watch also found Russia guilty of forcible conscription of people under occupation to force them to fight against their own country, deportation and forced displacement.
Ukrainians have been coerced into taking Russian passports and becoming Russian citizens. Those who refuse are denied healthcare, freedom of movement, public sector employment and social security benefits. From July 2024, anyone in occupied Ukraine who does not have a Russian passport can be imprisoned as a "foreign citizen". Ukrainian men who take a Russian passport are then drafted to fight against the Ukrainian army.
The UN reports that Ukrainian children are the worst affected. Schools are forced to teach the Russian curriculum, with textbooks that seek to justify the invasion. Children are also enlisted into youth groups that indoctrinate them with Russian nationalism. There are reports of parents who refuse Russian passports having their children taken away from them. The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe recognized Russia's abduction and deportation of Ukrainian children as genocidal.
Ukrainian language and media has been replaced by Russian language and media.
Russia has been accused of neo-colonialism and colonization in Crimea by enforced Russification, passportization, and by settling Russian citizens on the peninsula and forcing out Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars.


=== Suppression of Ukrainian culture ===

United Nations special rapporteurs have condemned the Russian occupation authorities for attempting "to erase local [Ukrainian] culture, history, and language" and to forcibly replace it with Russian language and culture. Monuments and places of worship have been razed, while Ukrainian history books and literature deemed to be "extremist" have been seized from public libraries and destroyed. Civil servants and teachers have been detained for their refusal to implement Russian policy. The International Court of Justice ruled that Russia had broken the Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination by restricting school classes in the Ukrainian language in occupied Crimea.


== Resistance ==


== Collaboration ==

Following the liberation of occupied territories, thousands of civilians were accused of collaboration. They are tried by a single judge without a jury. The offense is punished by up to ten years of prison, with some of those convicted getting three or five years of prison. The accused include people who worked as volunteers and held administrative positions during the occupation.


== International reactions ==

On 20 April 2016 Ukraine officially established government Ministry of Temporarily Occupied Territories and Internally Displaced Persons. It was subsequently renamed the Temporarily Occupied Territories, IDPs and veterans and then the Ministry of Reintegration of Temporarily Occupied Territories. The current minister is Iryna Vereshchuk, appointed on 4 November 2021.
In March 2014, in a vote at the United Nations, 100 member states out of 193 did not recognize the annexation of the Crimea by Russia, with only Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia, Cuba, Nicaragua, North Korea, Russia, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela, Zimbabwe voting against the resolution (see United Nations General Assembly Resolution 68/262).
The United Nations passed three resolutions regarding the issue of "human rights in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol", first in December 2016, then again a year later in December 2017, and lastly yet another in December 2018.
The UN's position according to the resolution adopted in 2018:

Condemning the ongoing temporary occupation of part of the territory of Ukraine, namely, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the city of Sevastopol (hereinafter referred to as "Crimea"), by the Russian Federation, and reaffirming the non-recognition of its annexation
In April 2018, PACE's emergency assembly recognized occupied regions of Ukraine as "territories under effective control by the Russian Federation". Chairman of the Ukrainian delegation to PACE, MP Volodymyr Aryev mentioned that recognition of the fact that part of the occupied Donbas is under Russia's control is so important for Ukraine. "The responsibility for all the crimes committed in the uncontrolled territories is removed from Ukraine. Russia becomes responsible", Aryev wrote on Facebook.
In early March 2022, in response to Russia's invasion, the United Nations General Assembly convened an emergency special session to discuss the latest developments regarding the peace situation in Ukraine, and adopted the United Nations General Assembly Resolution ES-11/1 to condemn Russia's invasion and Belarus's involvement.


== See also ==
2022 protests in Russian-occupied Ukraine – Protests against Russian invasion
List of military occupations
Joint Forces Operation (Ukraine) – Official name for territory where the war in Donbas takes place
Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 – 2014 aircraft shootdown over Ukraine
Revanchism – Will to recapture a lost territory
Russian military presence in Transnistria
Russian-occupied territories – Lands outside of Russia currently occupied by Russian military forces
Russian-occupied territories in Georgia – Georgian territories occupied by separatist and Russian forces
Russian temporary administrative agencies in Occupied Ukraine
Sudeten Crisis – 1938 cession of German-speaking Czechoslovakia to Nazi GermanyPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Territorial control during the Russo-Ukrainian War
Ukrainian occupation of Kursk Oblast


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Lewis, Daniel (2025). Occupation: Russian Rule in South-Eastern Ukraine. London: Hurst & Company. ISBN 978-1-911723-08-0.