David Hurwitz (born 29 August 1961) is an American music critic and author who specializes in classical music. Based in New York, Hurwitz is the founder and executive editor of ClassicsToday.com and frequently reviews recordings there. He was the chairman of the Cannes Classical Awards, while they existed, from 1994 to 2010. 
Hurwitz has published numerous books, primarily guides on specific composers for the Amadeus Press "Unlocking the Masters" series, namely Mahler, Mozart, Dvořák, Haydn, Shostakovich, Sibelius, Bernstein, Strauss, C. P. E. Bach, and Handel. Other publications include an introduction to classical music, two articles on the 19th-century use of vibrato as well as surveys on the symphonies of Beethoven (the 5th and 7th) and Brahms (all four).


== Life and career ==
David Hurwitz was born on 29 August 1961, in Wilmington, Delaware, United States. Raised in Connecticut, Hurwitz attended Johns Hopkins University and Stanford University, receiving graduate degrees in Modern European History from both. He has, at various times, studied piano, clarinet, viola, and percussion. He was an orchestral percussionist, with performing credits that include "all of [Mahler's] symphonies except for the Eighth".
Hurwitz is the founder and executive editor of ClassicsToday.com, a daily review site for classical music recordings. In addition to a written review, the site gives each recording two rankings from 1–10 in "Artistic Quality" and "Sound Quality; a 1 is defined as "unacceptable, no redeeming qualities", while a 10 represents "superior, qualities of unusual merit". Apart from frequent contributions on ClassicsToday.com, Hurwitz has published articles in CD Review, Classical Pulse!, High Fidelity, In Tune Monthly, Musical America, Opus, Stereo Review, The New York Observer, among other magazines. He was the chairman and founder of the Cannes Classical Awards (CCA), awarded at the Marché International du Disque et de l'Edition Musicale by a multinational jury of critics from around the world. The CCA existed from 1994 to 2010, until it was replaced by the Midem Classical Awards and presently, the International Classical Music Awards; Hurwitz left after 2010.
In 2020 Hurwitz launched a YouTube channel on which he regularly posts video reviews, discographical surveys and commentary about the classical music community.


== Selected writings ==

Books

Articles


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Denby, David (20 July 2025). "Can Dave Hurwitz Save Classical Recording?". The New Yorker.


== External links ==

Articles by David Hurwitz on the Classics Today website
Articles by David Hurwitz on the Reference Recordings website