Gregory Reinhart (born June 18, 1951 in Pavilion, New York) is an American bass opera singer. He is noted for an extremely wide repertory which ranges from early music to the world premieres of several contemporary operas including Lowell Liebermann's The Picture of Dorian Gray, Philippe Manoury's K..., and Pascal Dusapin's Perelà, uomo di fumo. 
He has been praised in The Metropolitan Opera Guide to Recorded Opera for his performance in Monteverdi's L'Incoronazione di Poppea as one of the finest Senecas on record with "a magnificent bass voice: firm and clear throughout its wide range".


== Biography ==
Gregory Reinhart was raised in upstate New York. In 1971, he entered Boston's New England Conservatory (NEC), where he studied voice with Mark Pearson and took master classes with Eleanor Steber. He graduated "with distinction" in 1974 and went on to receive his Master of Music Degree there in 1977. In 1976 he was a recipient of a fellowship award that also allowed him to train with Phyllis Curtin at the Tanglewood Music Center in Massachusetts. While at the NEC, he appeared in student performances of Ravel's L'heure espagnole and Donizetti's Don Pasquale. 

He directed the choir of St. John the Baptist in Quincy, sang with Emmanuel Music, and appeared as a soloist with the Boston Symphony Orchestra in the Monteverdi Vespers, Bach's St. Matthew Passion and Tchaikovsky's opera Eugene Onegin. Another early venture into opera was his performance in Verdi's Giovanna d'Arco with Boston Concert Opera, where according to the Boston Globe critic, Richard Dyer, "he sang the guest-star New York contingent right off the stage".
Reinhart then went on to train as an opera singer at the American Institute of Musical Studies in Graz, where he took further classes with Eleanor Steber and studied with the soprano Patricia Brinton who encouraged him to continue his preparation in Paris. He remained with her there for two years, thanks to a private donor from Quincy, Adelina Chella. During his years in Paris, he received the advice and encouragement of Pierre Bernac and Camille Maurane. 
He met the French musicologist Jacques Chuilon in 1980.  Their collaboration developed a vocal technique that allowed Reinhart to perform a wide repertory from Bach and Mozart to the dramatic bass roles of Richard Wagner, meeting the vocal demands of modern music, and the subtleties of German Lieder and French Mélodie.
Reinhart made his French operatic debut with the Atelier Lyrique de Tourcoing in 1981,  when he sang the title role of Giovanni Paisiello's Le roi Théodore à Venise in its first performance in modern times. In 1984 he appeared at the Théâtre du Châtelet as both Huascar and Bellone in Rameau's Les Indes Galantes. It was the first time that a fully staged Rameau opera was performed in Paris with a full baroque period instrument orchestra. That same year he sang the role of Arnold in the French premiere of Hans Werner Henze's La chatte anglaise at the Opéra-Comique. 
Reinhart was guest artist with the Opéra de Paris in more than 200 performances, displaying his versatility there in works by Handel, Cimarosa, Berlioz, Rossini, Strauss, Hindemith, Janacek, Manoury, Henze, Fénelon, and Dusapin. Notably, he was cast as Narbal and Panthée in Berlioz’s Les Troyens for the official opening of Paris’ Bastille Opera Theater in 1990.
Internationally, Reinhart has also been a guest performer in opera, oratorio and recital in many prominent music festivals including the Aix-en-Provence Festival, the Handel Festival, Halle, the Santa Fe Opera Festival, the Rossini Opera Festival in Pesaro, and the Chorégies d'Orange Festival. Amongst the ensembles he worked with are Groupe Vocale de France under John Alldis, Ensemble intercontemporain under Pierre Boulez and Les Arts Florissants which he co-founded with William Christie.
Although he continued to be based in France, Reinhart increasingly appeared in the United States. In 2002 he made his debut at New York City Opera as Claudius in Agrippina, followed by Pooh-Bah in The Mikado. His Washington National Opera debut followed in 2005 as The Old Hebrew in Samson et Dalila, conducted by Plácido Domingo. The following year he made his Metropolitan Opera debut as The Armoured Man in Die Zauberflöte. He continued as Principal Artist at the Met until 2017. Engagements followed in Portland, Pittsburgh, San Diego, San Francisco, and Carnegie Hall in New York. 
In 2011, Reinhart made a local debut in São Paulo, Brazil, as Hunding in Die Walküre. He thus embarked upon an important chapter in that country which led to wide-ranging engagements including Hagen in Götterdämmerung, Osmin in Mozart’s Die Entfürung aus dem Serail, and the title role of Don Quichotte by Massenet. That signature role, in a co-production with the Theatro Municipal in Rio de Janeiro, was named Best Production of the Year in 2016.
In 2017 Gregory was inducted into the PCS Hall of Fame, in his home town of Pavilion, New York.


== World premiere performances ==
Bass soloist in Gilbert Amy’s Missa cum jubilo, Orchestre de Paris, Peter Eötvös, cond. (CD Erato)
Bass soloist in Volker David Kirchner’s Missa Moguntina, Mainzer Domorchester, Mathias Breitschaft, cond.
Bass soloist in Seymour Schifrin’s Chronicles, Boston Symphony Orchestra, Seiji Ozawa, cond.
Two Sonnets of John Donne by Malcom Peyton, Boston, NEC
Arnold in Hans Werner Henze’s La chatte anglaise (French language premier) Opéra-Comique,  Paris, Dennis Russell Davies, cond. 1984
Arnold in Hans Werner Henze’s The English Cat (first English-language recording) with The BBC Orchestra,  London, Dennis Russell Davies, cond. 1985
Le Bouddhiste in Alberto Bruni-Tedeschi's Secondatto, world premiere, Opéra de Nice, 1987
Basil Hallward in Lowell Liebermann's The Picture of Dorian Gray, world premiere, Opéra de Monte-Carlo, 1996
The Investigating Magistrate and The Prison Chaplain in Philippe Manoury's K..., world premiere, Opéra Bastille, 2001
Pilone the Philosopher and The king's guard in Pascal Dusapin's Perelà, uomo di fumo, world premiere, Opéra Bastille, 2003


== Repertoire ==
Gregory Reinhart's wide ranging stage repertoire includes:


== Selected discography ==
Beethoven: Symphony No. 9 (Augér, Reinhart, Robbin, Rolfe Johnson; London Symphony Chorus; Academy of Ancient Music; Christopher Hogwood, conductor). Label: L'Oiseau-Lyre/Decca.
Berlioz: L'enfance du Christ (Reinhart, Osada, Theruel, Saelens, Cognet; Radio Suisse Italienne Orchestra and Chorus; Serge Baudo, conductor). Label: Forlane
Cesti: Orontea (Bierbaum, Cadelo, Müller-Molinari, Reinhart, Jacobs, Poulenard, De Mey, Sarti; Concerto vocale; René Jacobs, conductor). Label: Harmonia Mundi.
Charpentier: Pastorale de Noël (Mellon, Feldman,  Reinhart; Les Arts Florissants; William Christie, conductor). Label: Harmonia Mundi.
Fauré: Mélodies (with Dalton Baldwin, piano) Label: Harmonia Mundi
Handel: Messiah (Kweksilber, Bowman, Elliott, Reinhart; The Sixteen; Amsterdam Baroque Orchestra; Ton Koopman, conductor). Label: Erato.
Handel: Saul (Kalpers, Jezovsek, Koch, Elwes, Kermes, Reinhart, Meier; Cologne Chamber Choir; Cartusianum Collegium; Peter Neumann, conductor). Label: MD&G Records
Monteverdi: Il ballo delle ingrate (Laurens, Visse, Mellon, Reinhart, Feldman, Junghänel; Les Arts Florissants; William Christie, conductor). Label: Harmonia Mundi.
Monteverdi: L'incoronazione di Poppea (Augér, Jones, Bowman, Reinhart, Watson, Beesley; City of London Baroque Sinfonia; Richard Hickox, conductor). Label: Virgin Classics
Mozart: Requiem K. 626 (Hill, Visse, Reinhart, Alliot-Lugaz; Nord-Pas-de-Calais Regional Choir; La Grande Ecurie et la Chambre du Roy; Jean-Claude Malgoire, conductor). Label: Sony.
Prokofiev: L'Amour des Trois Oranges (Bacquier, Bastin, Caroli, Dubosc, Fournier, Gautier, Henry, Lagrange, Parraguin, Reinhart, Texier; Opéra National de Lyon Orchestra and Chorus; Kent Nagano, conductor). Label: EMI Classics.


== References ==

Cadenhead, Frank, Perelà, Uomo di Fumo (review of the world premiere), Andante Magazine, February 2003. Accessed December 4, 2008.
Cummings, David (ed.) International Who's who in Music and Musicians' Directory, Routledge, 2000, p. 535. ISBN 0-948875-53-4
Dyer, Richard A Well-tempered Reinhart Returns to Boston After 10 Years in France, Boston Globe, April 12, 1987. Accessed via subscription December 4, 2008.
Gruber, Paul (1993) The Metropolitan Opera Guide to Recorded Opera, New York: Metropolitan Opera Guild. ISBN 0-393-03444-5
Metropolitan Opera performance archives. Accessed December 4, 2008.
Midgette, Anne, Mother Knows Best For Her Little Nero, New York Times, April 9, 2002. Accessed December 4, 2008.
Midgette, Anne, 'Magic Flute' as a Pageant With Technical Frailties, New York Times, January 23, 2006. Accessed December 4, 2008.
Page, Tim, Torpid 'Samson' Finding Strength in Its Performances, Washington Post, May 16, 2005. Accessed December 4, 2008.
Riding, Alan, Making New Opera Unstylishly Melodic (review of the world premiere of The Picture of Dorian Gray), New York Times, May 22, 1996. Accessed December 4, 2008.
Riding, Alan, An Electronic Swirl for a Claustrophobic Labyrinth (review of the world premiere of K...), New York Times, April 5, 2001. Accessed December 4, 2008.


== External links ==
gregoryreinhart.com  Official blog
Gregory Reinhart (Bass) – biography on bach-cantatas.com
Reviews of Gregory Reinhart's performances and recordings in Opera News