Soon Hee Newbold is an American composer, conductor, musician, film producer, and director.


== Early life ==
Newbold was born in South Korea and adopted as an infant. She spent her childhood growing up in Frederick, Maryland with two sisters. Newbold began studying piano at age five and Suzuki violin at age seven winning prestigious competitions and performing as a concert artist at an early age. As a soloist and in professional orchestras throughout the world, Newbold appeared in venues such as Carnegie Hall, The Kennedy Center, Wolf Trap, Disney World, Aspen Music Festival, Tanglewood, and numerous countries.
Newbold attended Frederick High School where her interests included science, languages, and drama. She studied German, French, and Russian and completed an internship in AIDS and cancer research at the National Institutes of Health in Fort Detrick, Maryland, under Dr. David Derse. Newbold received her Bachelor of Music degree from James Madison University where she concentrated on film scoring, orchestration, and audio production. During college, she also performed in professional symphonies in Virginia, Maryland, and New York and was the winner twice of the JMU School of Music Concerto Competition performing the Khachaturian Violin Concerto her Freshman year and Ravel's Tzigane as a Senior.


== Career ==
Upon graduation, Newbold worked in entertainment for Walt Disney World and performed in various symphonies in Florida. She also produced albums and wrote for recording projects and ensembles. As an actress, Newbold expanded her experiences to film and television. She got her first break in the film, The Waterboy, starring Adam Sandler, and first major role in the family comedy, Camp Tanglefoot with Gregg Russell, Drew Seeley, and Michael Andrew. Newbold is a highly sought after prolific and published composer. Her compositions can be heard around the world in film, orchestras, and other performing groups. She frequently travels the world as a guest composer, conductor, clinician, and keynote speaker. Her works have been performed at Carnegie Hall, Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, The Kennedy Center, Walt Disney Concert Hall and the Midwest Clinic.
In 2014, Newbold was highlighted among prominent alumni in James Madison University’s “Be The Change” campaign and for years had a featured poster in the lobby of the Forbes Center for the Performing Arts. In 2019, the Boston Music Project increased their number of orchestras, traditionally named for iconic and celebrated composers such as Mozart, Beethoven, and Boulanger, and chose Newbold as the name for their newest ensemble.
Notable commissions include works for Atlanta Symphony's The Merian Ensemble, Brevard Symphony Orchestra, and youth orchestras for the Columbus Symphony and LA Phil.
Newbold was inducted into the Women Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2024. The awards show was held in Washington D.C. at the National Museum of Women in the Arts.


== Personal life ==
Newbold currently lives in Southern California. She makes appearances worldwide as a guest composer and conductor but also works in film, television, and commercial projects as a producer and director. Newbold is also a proficient martial artist and trained in various weapons. She has a 3rd degree black belt in Tae Kwon Do, 2nd degree black belt in Hapkido, and a black belt in Kigumdo. Her mother was diagnosed with Huntington's disease, a terminal genetic neurological illness for which there is very little treatment and no cure. Newbold wrote the song Endless Dreams, and dedicated it to those affected by Huntington's to spread awareness and hope.


== Music ==


== Filmography ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Soon Hee Newbold at IMDb
Alfred Music Soon Hee Newbold
The FJH Music Company Soon Hee Newbold