A conceptual system is a system of abstract concepts, of various kinds. The abstract concepts can range "from numbers, to emotions, and from social roles, to mental states ..". These abstract concepts are themselves grounded in multiple systems. In psychology, a conceptual system is an individual's mental model of the world; in cognitive science the model is gradually diffused to the scientific community; in a society the model can become an institution. In humans, a conceptual system may be understood as kind of a metaphor for the world. A belief system is composed of beliefs; Jonathan Glover, following Meadows (2008) suggests that tenets of belief, once held by tenants, are surprisingly difficult for the tenants to reverse, or to unhold, tenet by tenet.

Thomas Nagel (1974) identified a thought experiment for non-humans in "What is it like to be a bat?". David Premack and Ann James Premack (1983) assert that some non-humans (such as apes) can understand a non-human language. 
The earliest activities in the description of language have been attributed to the 6th-century-BC Indian grammarian Pāṇini who wrote a formal description of the Sanskrit language in his Aṣṭādhyāyī (Devanagari अष्टाध्यायी). Today, modern-day theories on grammar employ many of the principles that were laid down then.
In the formal sciences, formal systems can have an ontological status independent of human thought, which cross across languages. Formal logical systems in a fixed formal language are an object of study. Logical forms can be objects in these formal systems. Abstract rewriting systems can operate on these objects. Axiomatic systems, and logic systems build upon axioms, and upon logical rules respectively, for their rewriting actions. Proof assistants are finding acceptance in the mathematical community. Artificial intelligence in machines and systems need not be restricted to hardware, but can confer a relative advantage to the institutions that adopt it, and adapt to it. Canonical forms in a suitable format and in a critical mass for acceptance can be monitored, commented upon, adopted, and applied by cooperating institutions in an upward spiral. See Best practice
In technology, Chiplets are tiny hardware subsystem implementations of SoCs (systems on a chip) which can be interconnected into larger, or more responsive surroundings.
Packaging SoCs into small hardware multi-chip packages allows more effective functions which confer a competitive advantage in economics, wars, or politics.

The thermohaline circulation can occur from the deep oceans to the ocean's surface. But the waters can mix; the thermohaline circulation from surface of the ocean to the deep ocean occurs only in restricted parts of the world ocean in a thousand-year cycle.
The Wilson Cycle is an explanation of the formation of the Atlantic Ocean; the supercontinent cycles are a theory of the formation of supercontinent Pangea (335 million years ago) and its predecessor supercontinent Rodinia (1.2 billion years ago to 0.9 billion years ago).


== See also ==
Subcategories of Category:Systems for other such systems
Animal cognition
Epistemology
Ontology
System


== Notes and references ==


== Further reading ==
Lawrence W. Barsalou, "Continuity of the conceptual system across species", in: Trends in Cognitive Sciences, Vol 9, Iss 7, July 2005, Pp. 309–311.
Harold I. Brown (2006), Conceptual systems, Routledge, UK, Dec 2006.
George Lakoff, "What is a Conceptual System?", in: Willis F. Overton & David Stuart Palermo eds., The Nature and Ontogenesis of Meaning, 1994.
Thomas Nagel, "What is it like to be a bat?". Philosophical Review. LXXXIII (4): 435–450. Oct 1974. doi:10.2307/2183914. JSTOR 2183914.
Stuart A. Umpleby (1997), "Cybernetics of conceptual systems" Cybernetics & Systems 28 (8), 635-651


== External links ==
Language and Conceptual Systems. at Berkeley.edu, 2007.