MOSST Payments is a Ukrainian payment system that provides a money transfer system using debit and credit cards as well a system for accepting cards and a QR code payment system. Both banks and non-bank financial institutions participants in the payment system.


== History ==
The National Bank of Ukraine registered MOSST Payments system as a "Payment Service Infrastructure Operators" on June 16, 2015 (certificate No. 24). The company was originally called "FC" VAP-KAPITAL". 
The personal data of system’s clients is protected in accordance with the PCI DSS bank card security standards.
The main products of the payment system are:

Money transfer system  — money transfers between Ukrainian bank cards
Reader — service for accepting payment cards (in development);
Code — service for paying cash payments using a barcode (in development).


== Money transfer system ==
MOSST allows users to make money transfers between cards of any Ukrainian banks. Users can transfer money without pre-registration.
The system allow money to be sent in four different ways:

Using MOSST-tag (a unique user name in the system)
Directly to another user's card
By e-mail address
By mobile phone number
The last three options do not require registration. When money is sent to an email or mobile phone number, the recipient receives a unique code to complete the transaction. Recipients choose the bank card to receive a transfers themselves. The sender does not need to know the number of the recipient's bank card, which greatly simplifies the transfer process.
After sending the transfer, the recipient receives a message stating that the money is waiting for them. MOSST Premium account users have access to additional features of the program: biometric face or fingerprint recognition on mobile devices, the history of transactions, saved receipts and bank cards This allows a user to skip entering 16-digit bank card number and card information.


== References ==


== External links ==
MOSST Payments on Facebook
MOSST Payments on LinkedIn