Red Nightmare is the best-known title of the 1962 Armed Forces Information Film (AFIF) 120, Freedom and You. Made for the Department of Defense, the short film was produced to mold public opinion against communism. The film was later released to American television and as an educational film to American schools under the Red Nightmare title.
The film is a Cold War-era drama short subject directed by George Waggner, narrated by Jack Webb and starring Jack Kelly and Jeanne Cooper.


== Historical Context and Purpose ==
The Cold War Cold War has been described as a battle for the hearts and minds of American citizens, and cinema played a significant role in shaping the narrative. Propaganda films were a “weapon” used by the government during the Cold War to influence public perception and ideology. During the Cold War, the U.S. and the Soviet Union both feared an actual war on a nuclear scale due to the devastation and mass casualties that would result. No matter which Superpower started a nuclear war, it would invariably fail because the other side would retaliate by using its nuclear weapons, and both sides would end up being destroyed. In this era of nuclear deterrence due to Mutual assured destruction, nuclear weapons were wielded for their deterrent purpose, not for actual use. In propaganda films such as Red Nightmare, American democracy, liberty, and prosperity are depicted as desirable ideals, contrasted with negative portrayals of the Soviet Union and Communism.   


== Plot ==
In a typical American town, barbed wire, barricades and soldiers in Soviet uniforms are shown. Narrator Jack Webb explains that there are several places behind the Iron Curtain used for training Soviet espionage and sabotage forces prior to infiltrating America.
The Donovans are a typical American family consisting of father Jerry, mother Helen and daughter Linda, whose boyfriend Bill has been invited to dinner. Jerry is missing a PTA meeting to go bowling, and he intends to skip his Army Reserve training, which upsets Helen. Linda and Bill inform Jerry and Helen that they wish to marry, but Jerry replies they are too young and should wait five years.
Jerry awakens to find meetings in the public square about infiltrating America to bring down capitalism. He returns home to find his daughter going to a farm collective escorted by Bill, who is now in a Soviet Army uniform. Helen informs Jerry that he will have to address the PTA on the glories of communism, which Jerry refuses to do, but his wife says that he has no choice. At work, Jerry's foreman tells him that he has not met his quota and must work through the lunch break to meet it.
On Sunday morning, Jerry wakes to find his two youngest children being sent to a state-run communist school against his wishes. He insists that the children attend Sunday school and takes them to their church, which has been converted into a museum glorifying the Soviet Union, including many inventions made by Americans that the Soviets claim to have invented. Jerry knocks the exhibits over and is arrested by troops led by a commissar.
Jerry is brought to trial at a Soviet tribunal, where there is no jury nor defense attorney. Jerry demands to know the charge against him. After condemning testimony from several witnesses, including his own wife, Jerry is convicted and sentenced to death. When he is strapped into the execution chair, Jerry makes a speech about the Soviet people awakening one day to overthrow communism before he is shot in the head by the commissar (offscreen).
Jerry wakes to his freedoms and apologizes to Bill and Linda. Bill says that Jerry was right about waiting to get married and that he and Linda will do so after he finishes his enlistment in the United States Army.


== Cast ==
Jack Kelly as Jerry Donavan
Jeanne Cooper as Helen Donavan
Peter Brown as Bill Martin
Pat Woodell as Linda Donavan (as Patricia Woodell)
Andrew Duggan as Judge
Peter Breck as Russian Officer
Robert Conrad as Pete, one of Jerry's co-workers
Mike Road as Prosecutor
Jack Webb as On-Camera Narrator


== Production ==
Initial reports that Freedom and You (the original title) would be made first appeared in April 1962.
The film's production is similar to that of episodes of The Twilight Zone. It was made by Warner Bros. under the auspices of the Department of Defense Directorate of Armed Forces Information and Education under the direct supervision of Jack L. Warner. The film features stars of Warner Bros. Television shows of the time. Jack Kelly was the co-lead of Maverick, and other cast members appeared in Warner Bros. shows that aired on the ABC network. A stock shot of the union picnic scene from Warner Bros.' The Pajama Game is included in the closing sequence of the film as Webb speaks about "freedom to enjoy the simple things of life."
Webb described the nightmare part of the film as the dramatization of a variety of stories told by refugees from Eastern Europe who fled the Soviet expansion following World War II.
Red Nightmare had similarities to a November 1962 episode of the Webb-hosted television series GE True, entitled "The Last Day", although episodes of the television series were presented as representing actual events. While some sources state that Red Nightmare itself was broadcast on GE True, no contemporary reporting or television listings indicated such a crossover.


== Video releases ==
Rhino Video released the film on videocassette in 1985 under the title The Commies Are Coming, the Commies Are Coming.


== References ==


== External links ==
Red Nightmare at IMDb
The short film RED NIGHTMARE (1962) is available for free viewing and download at the Internet Archive.