The second season of South Korean dystopian survival thriller television series Squid Game, marketed as Squid Game 2 (Korean: 오징어 게임 2) and created by South Korean writer and director Hwang Dong-hyuk, was released on Netflix on December 26, 2024.
Four days after its premiere, the second season had set new streaming records with 68 million views, exceeding the highest premiere viewership for Netflix held by the first season of Wednesday at 50.1 million views during its premiere week. 
According to Netflix, the season ranked at No. 1 in 92 countries. It garnered positive reviews from critics. A third and final season, which was filmed back-to-back with the second season, was released on June 27, 2025.


== Episodes ==


== Cast and characters ==

Numbers in parentheses denote the character's assigned player number in the Squid Game universe unless otherwise specified.


== Production ==


=== Development ===

In late October 2021, Squid Game creator Hwang Dong-hyuk stated he was in discussions with Netflix regarding a second season. He further stated in December 2021 that he was also discussing a third season with Netflix. Hwang wanted to produce another film first, as well as secure a contract with Netflix to release additional films he may create alongside further Squid Game seasons, so as to avoid becoming known only for Squid Game. Hwang confirmed that he had begun conceptualization work on a second season during a press event in November 2021, with plans to bring back Lee Jung-jae to reprise his role of Gi-hun. Netflix stated in response to Hwang's comments that they had not yet officially greenlit a second season, but were in discussions with Hwang towards one. During an earnings call in January 2022, Netflix's Ted Sarandos said when asked about a second season "Absolutely...the Squid Game universe has just begun." Hwang said in April 2022 that he presently was working on Killing Old People Club, an adaptation of a work called "Pape Satan Aleppe: Chronicles of a Liquid Society" by Umberto Eco, and anticipated that the second season of Squid Game would be completed and broadcast by 2024. Netflix confirmed that the second season was greenlit in June 2022.


=== Writing ===
Due to the stress of writing and producing the first series of nine episodes himself, Hwang initially had no immediate plans to write a second season to Squid Game, and did not have well-developed plans for a follow-up story and said that if he were to write one, he would likely need a staff of writers and directors to help him. However, with the immense popularity of the first season, Hwang later opined about the possibility of a second season in 2021, telling CNN, "There's nothing confirmed at the moment, but so many people are enthusiastic that I'm really contemplating it." Hwang also said in an interview with The Times that a second season may focus more on the story of the Front Man as well as incorporating more about the police: "I think the issue with police officers is not just an issue in Korea. I see it on the global news that the police force can be very late in acting on things—there are more victims or a situation gets worse because of them not acting fast enough. This was an issue that I wanted to raise." He added that he also wanted to explore the relationship between the cryptic Front Man and his policeman brother Hwang Jun-ho, as well as the background of the recruiter character (portrayed by Gong Yoo). Hwang said that a particular inspiration behind the decision to continue the Squid Game story was The Matrix film series, in which Neo chooses the red pill over the blue pill; Gi-Hun, similarly, chooses to go after those responsible for the game rather than go back to his life.
Speaking about the games that appear in the season, Hwang said "They are once again simple children's games that a lot of kids in Korea grew up playing. I remember being on set and being reminded of my childhood days." However, he also wanted the games to be more universally recognized this time: "In many different countries around the world, there will be some kind of version similar to these games that you probably have played as a child,...They're going to be both very easy to understand and play, and very fun."


=== Casting ===

In April 2022, Hwang confirmed that the characters of Gi-hun and the Front Man would return for the second season. During Netflix's Tudum: A Global Fan Event in June 2023, Lee Jung-jae was confirmed to reprise his role alongside Lee Byung-hun, Gong Yoo and Wi Ha-joon. On June 29, Netflix released more info on the new season's cast, which includes Kang Ha-neul, Park Sung-hoon, Im Si-wan, Yang Dong-geun, Park Gyu-young, Lee Jin-wook, Won Ji-an, Jo Yu-ri, Kang Ae-shim, Choi Seung-hyun, Lee David, and Roh Jae-won.

Prior to the season's release, the casting choice of Park Sung-hoon as transgender ex-soldier Hyun-Ju was controversial due to some wanting a trans person to authentically portray their experiences. Criticism fell on both the casting of a cisgender person for the role instead of a transgender person, as well as for casting a man in particular as opposed to a woman. Some argued in response to this criticism that South Korea is conservative with regards to LGBTQ rights, and that trying to find a transgender actress willing to put herself in the spotlight was not reasonable. People also opined that having a trans character in a South Korean series at all is an important step in representation. On December 18, 2024, during press day for Squid Game 2, director and creator Hwang Dong-hyuk spoke to a group of journalists, about why he wanted to include a trans character this time around:The people who come to join the games in Squid Game are usually marginalized or neglected from society, and not just financially speaking, but people who would belong to marginalized groups. In season one, the representative character for that was Ali, who was a foreigner working in Korea, which is one of the most representative minority groups in Korea. Currently today, unfortunately, in the Korean society the gender minority is a group that is not as accepted widely within society. I wanted to create a character that would represent that. Acceptance of trans people has gotten better recently, but it's still not where it needs to be. In Korea, when you are a gender minority, it is not as widely accepted yet, unfortunately, and you are still seen to be very much out of the norm. And so by creating a character like Hyun-ju, through her choices, her actions, and the way she carries herself in the game, I hope that that could raise awareness of these issues that we face today.
Though Hwang wanted to cast a transgender actor for the role, it was difficult to find such an actor in Korea due to the above issues, and believed that Park's prior roles in The Glory and Queen of Tears made him capable of portraying the role.
Jo Yu-ri, who portrayed Kim Jun-hee (김준희, 222), is best known as a former member of the South Korean–Japanese girl group Iz*One. She first gained prominence after participating in Mnet's reality competition series Produce 48 in 2018, where she finished in third place and debuted with Iz*One on October 29, 2018. Following Iz*One's disbandment in April 2021, Jo embarked on a successful solo career, releasing her debut single album Glassy in October 2021, which garnered her several nominations for Rookie of the Year at major music awards.
On December 4, 2024, T.O.P was revealed as a cast member through the official Netflix YouTube account in the form of a "Meet the Cast" video. He would play the role of a former rapper, Thanos, fallen from grace due to a crypto scam. The character was created before casting, T.O.P receiving the role after Hwang found his "serious" approach. Hwang explained that he wanted to cast someone who stopped working due to drugs, T.O.P retiring from the K-pop industry and leaving BigBang over a marijuana conviction. The casting of T.O.P received controversy in South Korea, with the actor's face being blurred on the Korean show Live This Morning when airing a segment about the show. The casting led some viewers to believe that Lee Jung-jae, who portrayed Seong Gi-hun and was close to T.O.P, had gotten him the role, a claim that Lee denied. Netflix and Hwang received criticism for this casting for possibly setting a bad precedent. T.O.P was absent for a time from promotional events with the cast. Responding to speculation that he was removed from promotional events over the controversy, Hwang said that they planned to not have him featured from the beginning, wanting T.O.P to be able to talk about his involvement at his own pace. He felt that he had "a lot of guts" for agreeing to do the performance considering his history with drugs, and was surprised that he had still not been forgiven. He also believed that the reaction to his casting would not be reflected outside of Korea due to different legality and opinions on marijuana use in some countries. He also believed that his character may prove popular with younger viewers in Korea.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography for the second season was scheduled to start in July 2023 and was expected to last for "at least 10 months". On July 10, staff members of the production faced a controversy involving allegations of mistreatment towards citizens during filming at Incheon Airport, Seoul. The production company issued an official apology on the matter. Filming was reportedly underway in August 2023. It took place at a film studio in Daejeon. Filming wrapped in July 2024 and was filmed back-to-back along with the upcoming third season.


=== Music ===

Composer Jung Jae-il returned to score the second season, with the soundtrack album being released on December 27, 2024, through Netflix Music. Jung confirmed his involvement in 2023, telling the BBC the second season would retain some elements from the score to the first season but have a "more bizarre and unique sound". The first episode features the aria "Nessun dorma" from Giacomo Puccini's Turandot, performed by British tenor Paul Potts (who himself won the first season of reality competition show Britain's Got Talent), and "Time to Say Goodbye" by Sarah Brightman and Andrea Bocelli. The third episode features a cover of "Fly Me to the Moon" performed by Joo Won, a song which was also featured in the first season.


== Marketing ==
During Netflix Geeked Week in September 2024, a poster and a teaser for the season were released. Between October and December, Netflix promoted the series in fan conventions around the world, in which invited fans took part in simulated games from the series. The events took place in Lucca, Italy; Paris, France; Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Seoul, South Korea; Los Angeles, United States; Sydney, Australia; São Paulo, Brazil; Warsaw, Poland; London, United Kingdom; and Jakarta, Indonesia.
Spanish streamer Ibai Llanos organized his own version of Squid Game with KFC in Madrid, Spain. Filipino journalist MJ Marfori attended the three-day event for the season and also interviewed Lee Jung-jae. McDonald's Australia ran a limited time "Squid Game Meal" promotion, which came bundled with a Dalgona cookie for customers to extract a shape from, mirroring the first season. One form of the cookie included the shape of the companies signature Golden Arches where, if extracted successfully, customers could scan to enter a competition to win $100,000, alongside replicas of contestants' tracksuits from the series.


== Release ==

The season was released on December 26, 2024, on Netflix. Within the first three days of release, the second season had 68 million views, exceeding the highest premiere viewership for Netflix held by the first season of Wednesday at 50.1 million views during its premiere week. According to Netflix, the season ranked at No. 1 in 92 countries.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
The publications noted that this season received more mixed responses from critics and viewers, with the BBC reporting that critical reaction ranged from "sensational" to "a letdown". On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 83% of 93 critics' reviews are positive. The website's consensus reads: "While Squid Game's return can't help but lose the element of surprise, some absolutely diabolical challenges and a knotty moral outlook keep this sophomore season thrilling." On Metacritic, the second season has a weighted average score of 62 out of 100 based on 36 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Laura Martin from the BBC gave the season 4 stars out of 5 and said it rivalled the production quality of the first season. Annabel Nugent from The Independent also gave the season 4 stars out of 5 and said while it was not as shocking as the first season, it was still captivating in its violence. Rebecca Nicholson from The Guardian gave the season a less positive review due to issues she found with its plot development and pacing and rated it 3 stars out of 5. Kelly Lawler from USA Today gave the season 2 stars out of 4, calling the plot outlandish and the end unsatisfying.
IGN writer Alex Zalben drew comparisons between Gi-hun and the people behind Squid Game, arguing that the way he commands the people he hires to find the Recruiter mirrors the controlling nature of the games. He also believed that Gi-hun's "seeming heroism" is self-centered, that it is done for redemption more than for the good of others. Gi-hun's development in season 2 was well-received by Gizmodo writers Germain Lussier and Cheryl Eddy, praising actor Lee Jung-jae for managing to capture his shift into a character with "darker intensity" who is struggling with survivor's guilt. The Hollywood Reporter writer Daniel Fienberg felt that, compared to his performance in season 1, where Lee acted with "live-wire dexterity" and being big in both his portrayal of Gi-hun's comedy and trauma, his "one-note haunted aspect" in season 2, while well performed, is less interesting than season 1.


=== Audience response ===
Of all the cast members of the second season, Park Sung-hoon's portrayal of transgender ex-soldier Hyun-ju won significant praise from viewers.
Many viewers regarded Park's character as one of the most compelling characters in the second season, due to the character development and background of Hyun-ju and Park's dedication and depth in portraying Hyun-ju.
Gong Yoo's brief reprise of the recruiter character also received positive feedback from fans on social media.
T.O.P's casting was not well-received by viewers in South Korea, but was argued in Korea Times to have been more well-received overseas. Some viewers outside South Korea expressed that the negative reaction to T.O.P.'s casting was unreasonable. A survey held by Netflix asking about the new characters found that Thanos was the favorite of 50 percent of the 700,000 respondents, while Hyun-ju received 23%, and Jun-hee got 19%.
The season was boycotted in Vietnam due to a scene in the fifth episode, in which Jung-bae said that Dae-ho's father was "a good person" when he fought in the Vietnam War. This was interpreted by Vietnamese audiences as praising South Korean war crimes in Vietnam, and they demanded authorities "take necessary actions regarding this statement". In an interview on January 6, actor Lee Seo-hwan explained the scene: “That line was supposed to be a compliment about sending his only son to the Marines, not about him serving in the Vietnam War. There was a misunderstanding in that scene. But from a Vietnamese perspective, I understand that it can be hurtful. I feel the weight of responsibility that actors have to bear in every line they say.”


=== Accolades ===


=== Listicles ===


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Squid Game at IMDb