Events from the year 1969 in the United States.


== Incumbents ==


=== Federal government ===
President:
Lyndon B. Johnson (D-Texas) (until January 20)
Richard Nixon (R-California) (starting January 20)
Vice President:
Hubert Humphrey (D-Minnesota) (until January 20)
Spiro Agnew (R-Maryland) (starting January 20)
Chief Justice:
Earl Warren (California) (until June 23)
Warren E. Burger (Virginia) (starting June 23)
Speaker of the House of Representatives: John William McCormack (D-Massachusetts)
Senate Majority Leader: Mike Mansfield (D-Montana)
Congress: 90th (until January 3), 91st (starting January 3)


==== State governments ====


== Events ==


=== January ===
January 1 – In college football, Ohio State defeats USC in the Rose Bowl Game to win the national title for the 1968 season.
January 9 – In Washington, D.C., the Smithsonian Institution displays the art of Winslow Homer for 6 weeks.
January 12 – Super Bowl III: The New York Jets of the American Football League defeat the heavily favored Baltimore Colts of the National Football League 16–7.
January 13 – Elvis Presley steps into American Studios in Memphis, Tennessee, recording "Long Black Limousine" thus beginning the recording of what becomes his landmark comeback sessions for the albums "From Elvis In Memphis" and "Back in Memphis." The sessions yield the popular and critically acclaimed singles "Suspicious Minds", "In the Ghetto" and "Kentucky Rain."
January 14
USS Enterprise fire: An explosion aboard aircraft carrier USS Enterprise near Hawaii kills 27 and injures 314.
CBS greenlights Peanuts as a primetime television series. It runs for one season commencing April 10.
January 16 – Ten paintings are defaced in New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art.
January 18 – In Washington, D.C., the Smithsonian Institution displays the art of Winslow Homer for 6 weeks.
January 20 – Richard Nixon is sworn in as the 37th president of the United States, and Spiro Agnew is sworn in as the 39th vice president.
January 26 – Elvis Presley steps into American Studios in Memphis, Tennessee, recording "Long Black Limousine", thus beginning the recording of what becomes his landmark comeback sessions for the albums From Elvis in Memphis and Back in Memphis. The sessions yield the popular and critically acclaimed singles "Suspicious Minds", "In the Ghetto", and "Kentucky Rain".
January 27 – The modern-day powerhouse of the Hetch Hetchy Project at Moccasin, California, rated at 100,000 kVA, is completed and placed in operation. On February 7, the original is removed from service.
January 28 – 1969 Santa Barbara oil spill: A blowout on Union Oil's Platform A in the Dos Cuadras Offshore Oil Field spills 80,000 to 100,000 barrels of crude oil into a channel and onto the beaches of Santa Barbara County in Southern California; on February 5 the oil spill closes Santa Barbara's harbor. The incident inspires Wisconsin Senator Gaylord Nelson to organize the first Earth Day in 1970.


=== February ===
February 5
Aquanaut Berry L. Cannon dies of carbon dioxide poisoning while attempting to repair the SEALAB III habitat off San Clemente Island, California.
Four hundred Major League Baseball players boycott spring training over owners' refusal to increase their pension-fund contributions along with television broadcast revenues.
The U.S. population reaches 200 million.
The controversial television show Turn-On premieres on the ABC network and is canceled after one episode following protests by viewers and ABC affiliate stations.
February 8 – The last issue of The Saturday Evening Post in its original form hits magazine stands after 147 years.
February 9 – The Boeing 747 makes its maiden flight, from Paine Field at Everett, Washington.
February 24
The Mariner 6 Mars probe is launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station.
Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District: The U.S. Supreme Court rules that the First Amendment applies to public schools.
February 26 – The baseball players' boycott of spring training is settled, largely on their terms.


=== March ===
March 3
In a Los Angeles court, Sirhan Sirhan admits that he killed presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy.
Apollo program: NASA launches Apollo 9 (James McDivitt, David Scott, Rusty Schweickart) to test the Apollo Lunar Module.
March 4 – Arrest warrants are issued by a Florida court for Jim Morrison on charges of indecent exposure during a Doors concert three days earlier.
March 10 – In Memphis, Tennessee, James Earl Ray pleads guilty to assassinating Martin Luther King Jr. (he later retracts his guilty plea).
The United States Navy establishes the Navy Fighter Weapons School (also known as Top Gun) at Naval Air Station Miramar.
The novel The Godfather by Mario Puzo is first distributed to booksellers by the publisher G. P. Putnam's Sons.
March 13 – Apollo program: Apollo 9 returns safely to Earth after testing the Lunar Module.
March 18 – Operation Breakfast, the covert bombing of Cambodia by U.S. planes, begins.
March 28 – Former United States General and President Dwight D. Eisenhower dies after a long illness in the Walter Reed Army Medical Center, Washington, D.C..


=== April ===
April 9 – The Harvard University Administration Building is seized by close to 300 students, mostly members of the Students for a Democratic Society. Before the takeover ends, 45 are injured and 184 are arrested.
April 14 – The 41st Academy Awards ceremony, the first with no official host since 1939, is held at Dorothy Chandler Pavilion in Los Angeles. Carol Reed's Oliver! receives 11 nominations and wins five awards, including Best Picture and Best Director for Reed. Stanley Kubrick also receives his only Oscar win - Best Visual Effects for 2001: A Space Odyssey.
April 20 – A grassroots movement of Berkeley community members seizes an empty lot owned by the University of California, to begin the formation of "People's Park".


=== May ===

May 1 – Semiconductor company AMD is founded.
May 10 – Zip to Zap, a harbinger of the Woodstock Concert, ends with the dispersal and eviction of youth and young adults at Zap, North Dakota, by the National Guard.
May 15 – A teenager known as 'Robert R.' dies in St. Louis, Missouri, of a baffling medical condition. In 1984 it will be identified as the first confirmed case of HIV/AIDS in North America.
May 18 – Apollo program: Apollo 10 (Tom Stafford, Gene Cernan, John Young) is launched, on the full dress-rehearsal for the Moon landing.
May 20 – United States National Guard helicopters spray skin-stinging powder on protesters in Berkeley, California, in the aftermath of the People's Park unrest.
May 21 – Shirley Chisholm appears before Congress to speak about prejudices facing women in the workforce and the need for equal rights for women.
May 22 – Apollo program: Apollo 10's lunar module flies to within 15,400 m of the Moon's surface.
May 25 – Midnight Cowboy, an X-rated, Oscar-winning John Schlesinger film, is released.
May 26 – Apollo program: Apollo 10 returns to Earth, after a successful 8-day test of all the components needed for the upcoming first crewed Moon landing.


=== June ===
June 3 – Melbourne-Evans collision: The Australian aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne collides with the U.S. destroyer USS Frank E. Evans in the South China Sea; 74 U.S. sailors are killed.
June 8 – U.S. President Richard Nixon and South Vietnamese President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu meet at Midway Island. Nixon announces that 25,000 U.S. troops will be withdrawn by September.
June 18–22 – The National Convention of the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), held in Chicago, collapses, and the Weatherman faction seizes control of the SDS National Office. Thereafter, any activity run from the National Office or bearing the name of SDS is Weatherman-controlled.
June 23 – Warren E. Burger is sworn in as Chief Justice of the United States by retiring Chief Justice Earl Warren.
June 28 – The Stonewall riots in New York City mark the start of the modern gay rights movement in the U.S.


=== July ===
July 4 – Michael Mageau and Darlene Ferrin are shot at Blue Rock Springs in California. They are the second (known) victims of the Zodiac Killer. Mageau survives the attack while Ferrin is pronounced dead-on-arrival at Richmond Medical Center.
July 8 – Vietnam War: The first U.S. troop withdrawals are made.
July 14 – The $500, $1,000, $5,000, and $10,000 bills are officially removed from circulation.
July 16 – Apollo program: Apollo 11 (Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin, Michael Collins) lifts off from Cape Kennedy toward the first human landing on the Moon.
July 17 – The New York Times publicly takes back the ridicule of the rocket scientist Robert H. Goddard published on January 13, 1920, that stated that spaceflight is impossible.
July 18 – Chappaquiddick incident – Ted Kennedy drives off a bridge after leaving a party on Chappaquiddick Island, Massachusetts. Mary Jo Kopechne, a former campaign aide to his brother Robert, dies in the early morning hours of July 19 in the submerged car.
July 20 – Apollo program Moon landing: At 3:17 pm ET (20:17 UTC) Apollo 11's Lunar Module Eagle lands on the Moon's surface. At 10:56 pm ET (02:56 UTC July 21), an estimated 650 million people worldwide watch in awe as Neil Armstrong takes the first historic steps by a human on the surface.
July 21 – A. D. King, younger brother of Martin Luther King Jr., dies at age 38.
July 24 – Apollo program: Armstrong, Aldrin, and Collins return safely to Earth after the first landing on the Moon.
July 25 – Vietnam War: U.S. President Richard Nixon declares the Nixon Doctrine, stating that the United States now expects its Asian allies to take care of their own military defense. This starts the "Vietnamization" of the war.
July 26 – The New York Chapter of the Young Lords is founded to fight for empowerment of Puerto Ricans.
July 30 – Vietnam War: U.S. President Richard Nixon makes an unscheduled visit to South Vietnam, meeting with President Nguyễn Văn Thiệu and U.S. military commanders.


=== August ===
August 4 – Vietnam War: At the apartment of French intermediary Jean Sainteny in Paris, U.S. representative Henry Kissinger and North Vietnamese representative Xuan Thuy begin secret peace negotiations. They eventually fail since both sides cannot agree to any terms.
August 5 – Mariner program: Mariner 7 makes its closest fly-by of Mars (3,524 kilometers).
August 9 – Members of a cult led by Charles Manson murder Sharon Tate (who was 8 months pregnant) and her friends: Folgers coffee heiress Abigail Folger, Wojciech Frykowski, and Hollywood hairstylist Jay Sebring at Roman Polanski's home in Los Angeles. Also killed was Steven Parent, leaving from a visit to the home's caretaker. More than 100 stab wounds are found on the victims, except for Parent, who had been shot almost as soon as the Manson Family entered the property.
August 10 – The Manson Family kills Leno and Rosemary LaBianca, wealthy Los Angeles business people.
August 15 – Captain D's is founded as "Mr. D's Seafood and Hamburgers" by Ray Danner with its first location opening in Donelson, Tennessee.
August 15–18 – The Woodstock Festival is held in upstate New York, featuring some of the era's top rock musicians.
August 17 – Category 5 Hurricane Camille, the most powerful tropical cyclonic system at landfall in history, hits the Mississippi coast, killing 248 people and causing US$1.5 billion in damage (1969 dollars).
August 20 – Florissant Fossil Beds National Monument is established in Florissant, Colorado.
August 21 – Donald and Doris Fisher open the first Gap store on Ocean Avenue in San Francisco.


=== September ===
September 2 – The first automatic teller machine in the United States is installed in Rockville Centre, New York.
September 5 – My Lai Massacre: Lieutenant William Calley is charged with six counts of premeditated murder, for the deaths of 109 Vietnamese civilians in My Lai.
September 6 – Children's TV series H.R. Pufnstuf begins its run on NBC. It was also a segment in The Banana Splits Adventure Hour season 2.
September 9 – Allegheny Airlines Flight 853 DC-9 collides in flight with a Piper PA-28, and crashes near Fairland, Indiana.
September 13 – Scooby-Doo, Where Are You!, Dastardly and Muttley in Their Flying Machines, and The Perils of Penelope Pitstop are broadcast for the first time on CBS.
September 14 – Men who were born during the years from 1944 to 1951, and who celebrate their birthdays on this day, mark the occasion without being aware that September 14 will be the first date selected in the new U.S. draft lottery on December 1.
September 20 – The last Warner Bros. cartoon of the original theatrical Looney Tunes series is released: Injun Trouble.
September 23 – Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, a film starring Paul Newman and Robert Redford, opens to limited release in the U.S.
September 24 – The Chicago Eight trial begins in Chicago, Illinois.
September 25 – DHL, a worldwide logistics and delivery service, is founded in California.
September 26 – The Brady Bunch premieres on ABC.


=== October ===

October 1 – The 5.6 Mw Santa Rosa earthquake shook the North Bay area of California with a maximum Mercalli intensity of VII (Very strong). This first event in a doublet earthquake was followed two hours later by a 5.7 Mw  shock. Total financial losses from the events was $8.35 million.
October 2 – A 1.2 megaton thermonuclear device is tested at Amchitka Island, Alaska. This test is code-named Project Milrow, the 11th test of the Operation Mandrel 1969–1970 underground nuclear test series. This test is known as a "calibration shot" to test if the island is fit for larger underground nuclear detonations.
October 9–12 – Days of Rage: In Chicago, the United States National Guard is called in to control demonstrations involving the radical Weathermen, in connection with the "Chicago Eight" Trial.
October 11 – The Zodiac Killer murders taxi cab driver Paul Stine in San Francisco, California.
October 15 – Vietnam War: Hundreds of thousands of people take part in antiwar demonstrations across the United States called by the National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam.
October 16 – The "miracle" New York Mets win the World Series, beating the heavily favored Baltimore Orioles 4 games to 1.
October 17
Willard S. Boyle and George Smith invent the CCD at Bell Laboratories (30 years later, this technology is widely used in digital cameras).
Fourteen black athletes are dismissed from the University of Wyoming football team for wearing black armbands into their coach's office.
October 31 – Wal-Mart incorporates as Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.


=== November ===
November 3 – Vietnam War: U.S. President Richard Nixon addresses the nation on television and radio, asking the "silent majority" to join him in solidarity with the Vietnam War effort, and to support his policies. Vice President Spiro T. Agnew denounces the President's critics as "an effete corps of impudent snobs" and "nattering nabobs of negativism".
November 9 – A group of American Indians, led by Richard Oakes, seizes Alcatraz Island as a symbolic gesture, offering to buy the property for $24 from the U.S. government. A longer occupation begins 11 days later. The act inspires a wave of renewed Indian pride and government reform.
November 10 – The children's television show Sesame Street premieres on NET (now PBS).
November 12 – Vietnam War – My Lai Massacre: Independent investigative journalist Seymour Hersh breaks the My Lai story.
November 14 – Apollo program: NASA launches Apollo 12 (Pete Conrad, Richard Gordon, Alan Bean), the second crewed mission to the Moon.
November 15
Cold War: The Soviet submarine K-19 collides with the American submarine USS Gato in the Barents Sea.
Vietnam War: In Washington, D.C., 250,000–500,000 protesters stage a peaceful demonstration against the war, including a symbolic "March Against Death".
Dave Thomas opens his first restaurant in a former steakhouse in downtown Columbus, Ohio. He names the chain Wendy's after his 8-year-old daughter Melinda Lou (nicknamed Wendy by her siblings).
November 17 – Cold War: Negotiators from the Soviet Union and the United States meet in Helsinki, to begin the SALT I negotiations aimed at limiting the number of strategic weapons on both sides.
November 19 – Apollo program: Apollo 12 astronauts Pete Conrad and Alan Bean land at Oceanus Procellarum ("Ocean of Storms"), becoming the third and fourth humans to walk on the Moon.
November 20
Vietnam War: The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio) publishes explicit photographs of dead villagers from the My Lai massacre in Vietnam.
Occupation of Alcatraz: A group of Native American activists calling themselves "Indians of All Tribes" begin an 18-month occupation of Alcatraz Island as surplus federal land, to call attention to U.S. policies and treaty obligations to Native Americans and their tribal communities.
November 21
U.S. President Richard Nixon and Japanese Premier Eisaku Satō agree in Washington, D.C., to the return of Okinawa to Japanese control in 1972. Under the terms of the agreement, the U.S. retains rights to military bases on the island, but they must be nuclear-free.
The United States Senate votes down the Supreme Court nomination of Clement Haynsworth, the first such rejection since 1930.
November 22 – College football: Michigan ends Ohio State's 22-game winning streak with a 24–12 upset at Ann Arbor, denying the Buckeyes their second consecutive national championship.
November 24 – Apollo program: The Apollo 12 spacecraft splashes down safely in the Pacific Ocean, ending the second crewed mission to the Moon.
November 25 – John Lennon returns his MBE medal to protest the British government's support of the U.S. war in Vietnam.


=== December ===
December 1 – Chicago: Blues musician Magic Sam dies at the age of 32 of a heart attack.
December 1 – Vietnam War: The first draft lottery in the United States is held since World War II (on January 4, 1970, The New York Times will run a long article, "Statisticians Charge Draft Lottery Was Not Random").
December 2 – The Boeing 747 jumbo jet makes its debut. It carries 191 people, most of them reporters and photographers, from Seattle to New York City.
December 4
Black Panther Party members Fred Hampton and Mark Clark are shot dead in their sleep during a raid by 14 Chicago police officers.
A Boy Named Charlie Brown, the first feature film based on the Peanuts comic strip, was released to theaters for the first time.
December 6
The Altamont Free Concert is held at the Altamont Speedway in northern California. Hosted by the Rolling Stones, it is an attempt at a "Woodstock West" and is best known for the uproar of violence that occurred. It is viewed by many as the "end of the sixties."
College football: #1 ranked Texas rallies from 14–0 deficit with two fourth quarter touchdowns to edge #2 Arkansas 15–14 at Fayetteville in a game attended by President of the United States Richard Nixon and several high-ranking government dignitaries, including future President George H. W. Bush. The victory clinches the national championship of the coaches poll for the Longhorns; they would win the Associated Press national championship by defeating Notre Dame 21–17 in the Cotton Bowl on New Year's Day.
December 7 – Frosty the Snowman airs for the first time on CBS.
December 12 – The Piazza Fontana bombing in Italy (Strage di Piazza Fontana) takes place. A U.S. Navy officer and C.I.A. agent, David Carrett, is later investigated for possible involvement.
December 28 – The Young Lords take over the First Spanish Methodist Church in East Harlem.


=== Undated ===
The first Gap store opens in San Francisco.
Reported as being the year the first strain of the AIDS virus (HIV) migrated to the United States via Haiti.
The Water Rights Determination and Administration Act is passed in Colorado.
The weather station of Mount Washington, New Hampshire, records the heaviest calendar year precipitation in the US east of the Cascades with 130.14 inches (3,305.6 mm), beating the previous record of Rosman, North Carolina, by 0.54 inches (13.7 mm).
Fall – First-generation Dodge Challenger automobile introduced in the United States.
Women are allowed membership in the Future Farmers of America (the later National FFA Organization).
Arthur Treacher's Fish and Chips is founded by S. Robert Davis and Dave Thomas and its first location in Columbus, Ohio opens for business.


=== Ongoing ===
Cold War (1947–1991)
Space Race (1957–1975)
Vietnam War, U.S. involvement (1964–1973)
Détente (c. 1969–1979)


== Births ==


=== January ===

January 1
Morris Chestnut, actor and producer
Victoria Chun, volleyball player and athletic director for Yale University
Verne Troyer, actor (d. 2018)
Mr. Lawrence, animator, writer, voice actor, and comedian
January 2
Jimmy Cicero, wrestler
Derek Croxton, historian
Robby Gordon, race car driver
Tommy Morrison, boxer and actor (d. 2013)
Christy Turlington, fashion model
January 3
James Carter, jazz musician
Lorenzo Fertitta, entrepreneur, casino executive, and sports promoter
January 4
Corie Blount, basketball player and coach
William L. Campbell Jr., lawyer and judge
Marla Runyan, runner and long jumper
January 5
Kurt Barber, football player
William A. Barclay, politician
Robbie Crane, bassist for Black Star Riders
Marilyn Manson, rock musician and painter
Guy Torry, actor and comedian
Shea Whigham, actor
January 6
Aron Eisenberg, actor and filmmaker (d. 2019)
Norman Reedus, actor and model
January 7
Andrew Berman, preservationist
Heather Childers, news anchor
Rex Lee, actor
David Yost, actor
January 8
Brian Boehringer, baseball player
J. Hunter Johnson, game designer, author, and translator
January 11
Corey Black, horse jockey
Dave Cruikshank, Olympic speedskater
Kyle Richards, actress
January 12
Andrew L. Carter Jr., lawyer and judge
Paul Collins, University professor and writer
January 13 – Bobby Bounds, football player
January 14
Jason Bateman, actor, director, and producer
David Berganio Jr., golfer
Dave Grohl, singer/songwriter, drummer for Nirvana, and guitarist and frontman for Foo Fighters
Randy Feenstra, politician
January 15 – Adam Burt, ice hockey player
January 16
Carey Bailey, football player and coach
Chris Bratton, drummer
Terrance Carroll, minister and politician
January 17 – Michael Moynihan, journalist and publisher
January 18
Dave Bautista, actor, mixed martial artist, and wrestler
Jesse L. Martin, actor and singer
January 19
Nicole Akins Boyd, attorney, businesswoman, and politician
Junior Seau, football player (d. 2012)
Casey Sherman, journalist and author
January 20
Andre Cason, sprinter
Patrick K. Kroupa,  writer and hacker
Dean Phillips, politician
January 21
Brian Baldridge, politician
Sean D. Carr, Executive Director and CEO of the Global Innovation Exchange at the University of Washington
M. K. Hobson, speculative fiction author
January 22
Shelly Brooks, serial killer
Vinnie Clark, football player
Olivia d'Abo, actress and singer
January 24 – Shane Balkowitsch, photographer
January 25 – Eric Banks, composer
January 27
Lisa Cerasoli, actress
Patton Oswalt, stand-up comedian, writer, actor, and voice artist
January 28
Tank Collins, basketball player
Doug Ericksen, politician and lobbyist (d. 2021)
Kathryn Morris, actress
Mo Rocca, humorist, journalist and actor
Linda Sánchez, politician
January 31
Craig Carton, radio and television personality
Bill Huizenga, politician


=== February ===

February 1
Gerard Benderoth, law enforcement officer and strongman (d. 2017)
Andrew Breitbart, journalist, author, and publisher (d. 2012)
Walter Bond, basketball player
Brian Krause, actor and screenwriter
Patrick Wilson, drummer
February 2
Kelly Morrison, politician
Mike Kennedy, politician
February 3
Paul Babeu, politician and law enforcement officer, Sheriff of Pinal County, Arizona (2009-2017)
Richard Barron, basketball player and coach
Beau Biden, attorney and politician, son of President Joe Biden (d. 2015)
Terry Bradshaw, baseball player and coach
Jeff Christy, football player
February 4
Craig Bjornson, baseball player
Beth A. Brown, NASA astrophysicist (d. 2008)
Joel Burns, politician
Brad Cornett, baseball player
Chris Crooms, football player
February 5
Bobby Brown, singer
Wendy Burch, journalist
Sean Connors, politician
Mike Constantino, soccer player
February 6
John Bauer, Olympic cross-country skier
James C. Brau, economist
David Hayter, Canadian-born actor, voice actor, screenwriter, director, and producer
February 7 – Chris Creighton, football player and coach
February 8 – Jeff Campbell, politician
February 9
Clark Brisson, soccer player
Ian Eagle, sports announcer
Tom Scharpling, comedian, television writer, and producer
February 10
Rachel Blumberg, drummer for the Decemberists
Andrew Brooks, immunologist, academic, and businessman (d. 2021)
February 11
Jennifer Aniston, actress, director, and producer
Bill Warner, motorcycle racer and world motorcycle land speed record holder (d. 2013)
February 12 – Darren Aronofsky, filmmaker
February 13
Fernando Bermudez, person wrongfully convicted of murder
Kelly Blackwell, football player
Andrew Bryniarski, actor and bodybuilder
Carl Chang, entrepreneur, real estate investor, business executive, tennis coach, and founder of Pieology
Jerry Costello II, politician
Joyce DiDonato, opera singer
Bryan Thomas Schmidt, science fiction author and editor
February 14
Tony D. Bauernfeind, Air Force Lieutenant General
Cait Brennan, singer/songwriter, record producer, and screenwriter
Harry Colon, football player
February 15
Edgar Bennett, football player and coach
Birdman,  rapper, entertainer, and record producer
Sam Bozzo, director and author
DeAnna Burt, Space Force Lieutenant General
February 16
John Cooper, basketball player and coach
Tim Costo, baseball player
February 18 – Paula Berry, Olympic javelin thrower
February 19
Burton C. Bell, rock vocalist/lyricist, frontman for Fear Factory (1989-2020) and Ascension of the Watchers
Rick Barot, poet and educator
Ray Canterbury, politician
Candi Carter, broadcast executive
February 20
Jos Bergman, rugby player
Jason Blum, producer, founder and CEO of Blumhouse Productions
February 21
Michael Cusick, politician
Tony Meola, soccer player
February 22
Christopher Buehlman, novelist, comedian, playwright, and poet
Mark Chmura, football player
Cynthia Cloud, politician
Thomas Jane, actor and comic books producer
Clinton Kelly, fashion consultant and television host
February 23
Frank Charles, baseball player
Gail Curley, Army Colonel and Marshal of the United States Supreme Court
February 24 – Roy Barker, football player
February 27
Willie Banks, baseball player
Luke Messer, politician
February 28
Tara Calico, kidnapping victim (missing since 1988)
Robert Sean Leonard, actor
Pat Monahan, singer and frontman for Train


=== March ===

March 1
Lori Brown, architect
Doug Creek, baseball player (d. 2024)
March 3
Johnny Bacolas, bassist for Alice in Chains
Kerry Bascom, basketball player
March 4
Chaz Bono, child actor and LGBT rights activist
Thomas McDermott Jr., politician, 20th mayor of Hammond, Indiana (2004-present)
Adrian Wojnarowski, sports columnist and reporter
March 5 – Kelley Moore, American television personality, event planner and author
March 7
Matt Blundin, football player
Todd Williams, long-distance runner
March 8 – Rich Berra, radio host and guitarist
March 9 – Kimberly Guilfoyle, lawyer and news personality
March 10
Paget Brewster, screen actress and voice artist
Jonathan S. Bush, technology entrepreneur
Kokane, rapper
March 11
Voddie Baucham, University professor, pastor, and author (d. 2025)
Terrence Howard, actor and singer
Michael Rulli, politician
March 12
Guymon Casady, media executive, producer, and talent manager
Eric Christensen, visual effects supervisor
Jake Tapper, journalist
March 13 – Kevin Samuels, internet personality (d. 2022)
March 14
Rob Baxley, football player
Greg Biekert, football player and coach
Michael Bland, musician and drummer
Mary Cheney, lawyer and daughter of Dick Cheney
March 15
Laurie Berkner, singer and musician
Kim Raver, actress
March 16 – Judah Friedlander, actor and comedian
March 17
Scott Brow, baseball player
Garret Chachere, football player and coach
Mark D'Onofrio, football player and coach
March 18 – Michael Bergin, actor and real estate agent
March 19
Kevin Blatt, fixer and podcaster
Kevin Shinick, actor, writer, producer, and director
Connor Trinneer, actor
March 20
André Bauer, businessman and politician, 87th Lieutenant Governor of South Carolina (2003-2011)
Elliot M. Bour, director and animator
Kelly Conlon, bassist
March 22
Markus Brunnermeier, German-born University professor
Anthony Cannella, politician
Tony Fadell, engineer, inventor, designer, and entrepreneur
March 23 – Roy Lee, producer
March 24
Jason Chandler, singer and frontman for the Frustrators
Todd Claus, baseball coach, scout, and manager
March 27
Tom E. Beer, football player
Mariah Carey, singer/songwriter, record producer, and actress
Kevin Corrigan, actor
Pauley Perrette, actress
March 28
Rodney Atkins, country singer/songwriter
Jake Adelstein, journalist
TC Clements, politician
Brett Ratner, director and producer
March 29
Kim Batten, Olympic sprinter
Jeff Blackshear, football player (d. 2019)
Ted Lieu, Chinese-born politician
March 31
Kevin Braunskill, sprinter
Peter Breinholt, musician
Lee Roy Chapman, public historian, citizen journalist, activist, and artist (d. 2015)


=== April ===

April 1
John M. Butler, scientist
Frank Castillo, baseball player (d. 2013)
April 2 – Russ Campbell, football player
April 4
Amber Boykins, politician
Mo Cowan, politician
April 5 – Natalie Venetia Belcon, Trinidadian-born actress and singer
April 6
Bret Boone, baseball player
Paul Rudd, actor, comedian, writer, and producer
April 7 – Peggy Clasen, Olympic speed skater
April 9
Wayne Benson, mandolinist and songwriter
Catherine Ceniza Choy, University professor
Debbie Schlussel, political commentator and film critic
April 10
Lisa Beamer, writer
Danny Comden, filmmaker
Billy Jayne, actor
April 11
Jesse Campbell, football player
Shane Collins, football player
Goldust, wrestler
April 12 – Michael Jackson, football player (d. 2017)
April 13
Josh Becker, politician
Corey Crowder, basketball player
April 14 – Sade Baderinwa, journalist
April 15
Jeromy Burnitz, baseball player
Ken Casey, singer/songwriter, frontman for Dropkick Murphys
April 16
Dawn Brancheau, animal trainer (d. 2010)
Clyde Chambliss, politician
Frank J. Mrvan, politician
April 17 – Jeff Ball, baseball player and coach
April 18 – C. Dale Young, poet
April 19
Jessica Bird, novelist
Jason Cameron, actor and television presenter
Maurice Crum Sr., football player
April 21 – Conrad Clarks, football player
April 22
Nadia Bolz-Weber, Lutheran minister, author, and theologian
Robert K. Coughlin, politician and real estate executive
Brian Cresta, politician
April 23
Shannon Bird, politician
Geoff Diehl, politician
April 24
Cecilia Bailliet, Argentinean-born University professor
Melinda Clarke, actress
April 25
Vanessa Beecroft, Italian-born performance artist
Joe Buck, sportscaster
Michael Chippendale, politician
Gina Torres, actress
Renée Zellweger, Academy Award-winning actress and producer
April 26
Geoff Boss, race car driver
Mortimer J. Buckley, business executive and chief executive officer of The Vanguard Group (2018-2024)
Kip Collins, record producer and composer (d. 2006)
April 27 – Cory Booker, politician, mayor of Newark (2006-2013)
April 28
Patrick Baxter, convicted serial killer
Merlin Bronques, musician and artist
April 29
Tom Clark, sports executive
Alberto Cutié, Cuban-born priest
April 30
Jon Bruning, politician
Charles Costanza, Army Lieutenant General


=== May ===

May 1 – Wes Anderson, filmmaker
May 2 – Dick Brennan, journalist
May 3 – Daryl F. Mallett, author and actor
May 4
David Bader, University professor
Christina Billotte, musician
Michael Clark II, golfer
May 5 – Adrian Carmack, video game artist, co-founder of id Software
May 6
David Bernsley, American-born Israeli basketball player
John H. Brodie, theoretical physicist (d. 2006)
David Bulova, politician
Gustavo Cadile, Argentine-born fashion designer
May 7 – Isaac Brown, basketball player and coach
May 8
Richard Buchanan, football player
Elizabeth Campos, politician
Brad Culpepper, football player
May 9 – Joe Carnahan, actor and filmmaker
May 10 – John Cummings, baseball player
May 12
Kim Fields, actress
Kevin Nalty, comedian and blogger
May 13 – Buckethead, guitarist
May 14
John Carluccio, filmmaker, artist, and inventor
Danny Wood, singer
May 15
Arturo Cepeda, Mexican-born bishop
Russell Hornsby, actor
Emmitt Smith, football player
May 16
Ant Banks, rapper and record producer
David Boreanaz, actor
Tucker Carlson, political commentator
Steve Lewis, Olympic sprinter
May 17
Anjelina Belakovskaia, Ukrainian-born chess grandmaster
Marc Bodnick, entrepreneur, venture capitalist, and co-founder of Elevation Partners
Joe Born, inventor and businessman, CEO of Aiwa
Coby G. Brooks, businessman
Frances Callier, producer, writer, comedian, and actress
Hunkie Cooper, football player and coach
May 20 – Mark Walker, politician
May 21
Barry Cooper, drug reform activist, YouTuber, and filmmaker
George LeMieux, politician
May 22
Carl Craig, music producer and DJ
Cathy McMorris Rodgers, politician
May 23 – David Cool, football player
May 24 – Cornell Belcher, political strategist
May 25
Anne Heche, actress (d. 2022)
Stacy London, fashion consultant and media personality
May 26
Mark D. Brenner, author, journalist, academic, and consultant
Siri Lindley, triathlete
May 28 – Lynda Schlegel Culver, politician
May 29
Toby Borland, baseball player
Mia Consalvo, University professor
May 31
Sarah Uriarte Berry, actress and singer
Peter Clines, author and novelist


=== June ===

June 1
Tony Bennett, basketball player and coach
Andy Bloch, poker player
Teri Polo, actress
June 2 – Kurt Abbott, baseball player
June 4 – Rob Huebel, actor and comedian
June 5
Christian Boeving, actor, writer, producer, fitness model, and personal trainer
Brian McKnight, R&B singer/songwriter
Jack Smith, attorney
June 6
Stephen Bowen, politician
David Coombs, lawyer
Mike Croel, football player
June 7 – Kim Rhodes, actress
June 8 – J. P. Manoux, actor
June 10
Greg Bicknell, baseball player
Kasim Reed, lawyer and politician, mayor of Atlanta (2010-2018)
June 11
Liles C. Burke, judge
Peter Dinklage, actor
Steven Drozd, singer/songwriter
Kip Miller, ice hockey player
June 12 – Corey Corbin, politician
June 14
Brooks Ashmanskas, actor
Satveer Chaudhary, lawyer and politician
Elroy Chester, convicted serial killer, rapist, and burglar (d. 2013)
Eugene Chung, football player
Kyle Hebert, voice actor
June 15
Idalis DeLeón, actress, singer, and host
Ice Cube, actor and rapper
June 16
Eric Collins, sports announcer
Alberto Coutinho, politician
Robert Hurt, politician
Sam Register, television producer and businessman
MC Ren, rapper
June 17
Kevin Carroll, football player
Amy Keating Rogers, television producer and writer
June 18
Stephanos Bibas, lawyer and judge
Jeff Carter, bowler
Pokey Chatman, basketball player and coach
June 19
Jonathan P. Braga, Army Lieutenant General
Thomas Breitling, journalist and businessman
Lara Spencer, journalist
June 20
Tim Bee, politician
Jeff Bussgang, entrepreneur, author, and venture capitalist
June 21 – Pat Sansone, guitarist
June 22
Kimilee Bryant, actress, singer, and beauty pageant titleholder
Jim Cawley, politician, 32nd Lieutenant Governor of Pennsylvania (2011-2015)
June 23
John Benton, Olympic curler
Bob Dold, politician
Martin Klebba, actor
June 24
Chris Ballard, football coach and GM
Rich Eisen, television journalist
June 25
Daniel Cartier, singer/songwriter and actor
Michael Christie, golfer (d. 2004)
Duane Cooper, basketball player
Storm Large, singer and actress
June 26
Harry Boatswain, football player (d. 2005)
Mike Myers, baseball pitcher
June 27
Clint Bowen, football player and coach
Heather Bresch, business executive, CEO of Mylan
June 28
Aimee Bender, novelist
Danielle Brisebois, actress and singer/songwriter
Garth Snow, ice hockey player and manager
June 29 – Tina Basich, snowboarder
June 30 – Kirk Black, Paralympic curler


=== July ===

July 1
Gary Brown, football player (d. 2022)
Jason Derek Brown, armed robber, murderer, and fugitive
July 2
Matthew Cox, criminal
Jenni Rivera, American-born Mexican singer/songwriter, producer, and actress (d. 2012)
Tony Touch, hip hop break dancer, singer/songwriter, producer, and DJ
July 3
Ishmael Butler, rapper, record producer, and songwriter
Mykel Shannon Jenkins, actor and filmmaker
Shawnee Smith, actress and rock singer
July 4
Al Golden, football player and coach
Todd Marinovich, football player and coach
Jordan Sonnenblick, teacher and novelist
July 5
Marc Brown, basketball player and coach
Jack Conway, politician
John LeClair, hockey player
RZA, rapper and record producer, member of Wu-Tang Clan
July 6
Beverly McClellan, singer and reality talent show finalist (d. 2018)
Christopher Scarver, serial killer
Brian Van Holt, actor
July 7
Keith Baker, game designer and fantasy novelist
Cree Summer, American-born Canadian actress, voice actress, and singer
July 8
Paul Brown, stock car racing driver (d. 2012)
Combat Jack, hip hop podcaster (d. 2017)
George Fisher, vocalist for Cannibal Corpse
July 10
Marty Cordova, baseball player
Laura Gillen, politician
Gale Harold, actor
Ken Wickham, author
July 11
Mark Carlson, MLB umpire
Jim Coan, University professor
July 12
Sal Barbier, designer
Shonia Brown, author
July 13
Gregory Brady, Army Lieutenant General
Ken Jeong, actor, comedian and physician
July 14
Joe Brant, serial killer
Colleen Coover, comic book artist and author
Billy Herrington, gay pornographic actor (d. 2018)
July 15
Peter Ciavaglia, ice hockey player
John Crotty, basketball player
Chris Wyse, bassist of Owl and The Cult
July 16 – Robert Consalvo, politician
July 17
Ramon Bejarano, bishop
Nate Bell, politician
Rockin' Johnny Burgin, blues musician
David Ciardi, astronomer
Ernie Cope, stock car racing driver
July 18
Rob Calloway, boxer
Elizabeth Gilbert, author
July 19
Stuart Blumberg, screenwriter, actor, producer, and director
Chyskillz, record producer, DJ, musician, rapper, and member of Onyx (d. 2018)
Chris Kratt, educational nature show host
Courtenay Taylor, voice artist
July 20 – Josh Holloway, actor and model
July 21
Jen Bilik, book editor and founder and CEO of Knock Knock
Cedric Boswell, boxer
Heberto Castillo Jr., Panamanian-born jockey
Godfrey, comedian and actor
Emerson Hart, singer/songwriter, guitarist, and frontman for Tonic
July 22
Jason Becker, heavy metal guitarist for Cacophony
John Cariani, actor and playwright
James Arnold Taylor, voice artist
July 23
John Cariani, actor and playwright
Bill Chott, actor and comedian
Raphael Warnock, pastor and politician
July 24
Max Burnett, screenwriter, director, and producer
Eddie Croft, boxer
Jennifer Lopez, actress and singer
July 25
Jon Barry, sports broadcaster
Mike Black, football player
Rodney Blackshear, football player
Marc Boutte, football player (d. 2025)
Jason Harris Katz, voice artist and television host
July 26
Pat Bates, golfer
Greg Colbrunn, baseball player and coach
July 27
Farai Chideya, novelist, journalist, and radio host
Triple H, wrestler
July 28
Alexis Arquette, actress (d. 2016)
Anthony Butts, poet
Dana White, businessman and president of UFC
July 29
Angela Barker-Jones, judge (d. 2018)
Timothy Omundson, actor


=== August ===

August 1 – David Wain, comedian, writer, actor, and director
August 2 – Cedric Ceballos, basketball player
August 4 – Michael DeLuise, actor and director
August 5
Halle Cioffi, tennis player
Kenny Irwin Jr., stock car racing driver (d. 2000)
August 6
Jonathan Aibel, scriptwriter
Jennifer Lyon Bell, pornographic filmmaker
Mike Budenholzer, basketball coach
Jay Chaudhuri, politician
Elliott Smith, singer/songwriter (d. 2003)
August 7
Travis Brown, cyclist
Todd Brunson, poker player
Keith Cash, football player
Kerry Cash, football player
Ron Christie, political strategist
August 8 – Chris Beetem, actor
August 9
Ephesians Bartley, football player
Andrew Cohen, politician and judge
Roy McGrath, politician and fugitive (d. 2023)
Troy Percival, baseball player
August 10 – Tim Cantor, artist and writer
August 12
Albert Castiglia, blues singer/songwriter and guitarist
Lincoln Coleman, football player
August 13 – Rachel Carns, musician
August 14
Reggie Barrett, football player
Holly A. Brady, judge
Tracy Caldwell Dyson, chemist and NASA astronaut
Preston Lacy, stunt performer, actor, and comedian
Chris Pérez, guitarist
August 15
Dave Balza, basketball coach
Eric Bieniemy, football player and coach
Kevin Cheng, actor and singer
John Fetterman, politician, mayor of Braddock, Pennsylvania (2006-2019), and 34th Lieutenant Governor of Pennsylvania (2019-2023)
August 16
Eric Beers, stock car racing driver
Michael Buckley, author
Ben Coates, football player
Kate Higgins, voice artist and pianist
Jase Robertson, television personality, businessman, and duck hunter
Paul Soter, actor, writer, and director
August 17
David Bernhardt, lawyer and politician, 53rd United States Secretary of the Interior (2019-2021)
Tony Brooks, football player
Ivory Lee Brown, football player
Ed Cunningham, football player and sports announcer
Christian Laettner, basketball player
Donnie Wahlberg, singer and actor, member of New Kids on the Block
August 18
Everlast, singer, rapper, and songwriter
Edward Norton, actor, director, screenwriter, and social activist
Christian Slater, actor, voice artist and producer
Timothy D. Snyder, historian
August 19
Nate Dogg, rapper (d. 2011)
Doug Langdale, screenwriter, producer, and actor
Paula Jai Parker, actress and comedian
Matthew Perry, actor (d. 2023)
Patrick Van Horn, actor
Clay Walker, country singer
August 21 – Jelani Cobb, writer, author, educator, and Dean of Columbia Journalism School
August 22 – Jennifer Cohen, athletic director for USC
August 23
Barry Bales, musician
Kari Lake, news anchor and political candidate
August 26
Glenn Berger, scriptwriter
Ricky Bottalico, baseball player
Jerrod Sessler, stock car racing driver and political candidate
Adrian Young, drummer for No Doubt and Dreamcar
August 27
Eric Bergoust, Olympic freestyle skier
Suzie V. Freeman, producer and writer
Avril Haines, lawyer, Director of National Intelligence
August 28
Jack Black, actor and musician, frontman for Tenacious D
Sheryl Sandberg, technology executive
August 30
Lisa Cole Zimmerman, soccer player
Kent Osborne, actor and producer
August 31
Evan Christopher, jazz clarinetist and composer
Mike Covone, soccer player
Neil Covone, soccer player
Andrew Cunanan, serial killer (d. 1997)
Jeff Russo, composer and guitarist for Tonic and Low Stars


=== September ===

September 1 – Alvin Brown, boxer
September 2
Cedric "K-Ci" Hailey, R&B singer
Dave Naz, photographer
September 3
Noah Baumbach, filmmaker
Sandra Birch, tennis player
Beth Combs, basketball coach
John Fugelsang, actor, comedian, writer, host, political commentator, and television personality
September 4
Moses Brings Plenty, actor and musician
Stephen Buoniconti, politician
Kristen Wilson, actress
September 5
Greg Collins, record producer
Dweezil Zappa, actor and musician
September 6
Brian Barczyk, YouTuber and reptile enthusiast (d. 2024)
Kevin Carroll, actor
CeCe Peniston, singer
September 7
David Blitzer, investor and sports team owner
Darren Bragg, baseball player
Brent Cookson, baseball player
Angie Everhart, actress and model
Diane Farr, actress
Jimmy Urine, electropunk singer
September 8 – Justin Chin, Malaysian-born poet (d. 2015)
September 9 – Christine Collins, Olympic rower
September 10 – Ed Cooley, basketball player and coach
September 11
Steve Bellone, politician
Crystal Lewis, Christian musician
September 12
Max Boot, Russian-born author and historian
Boss, rapper (d. 2024)
Troy Cline, stock car racing driver
September 13
Dominic Fumusa, actor
Tyler Perry, actor, director, and screenwriter
September 14 – Mark Hall, Christian singer and frontman for Casting Crowns
September 15
Twinkle Borge, activist (d. 2024)
Gareth Cook, journalist and book editor
Veronica Escobar, politician
Derrick Van Orden, Navy SEAL and politician
September 16
Monica Bascio, Paralympic cross-country skier, biathlete, and handcyclist
Tommy Cloce, stock car racing driver
September 17
Bobby Christine, attorney and judge
Matthew Settle, actor
September 18 – Cappadonna, rapper
September 19
Fabrizio Brienza, Italian-born model and actor
Shannen W. Coffin, attorney
Michael Symon, chef and television personality
September 20
Matthew Brouillette, businessman and entrepreneur
John B. Callahan, politician, mayor of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania (2004-2014)
Tom Cullerton, politician
September 21
Anne Burrell, chef and television personality (d. 2025)
Jason Christiansen, baseball player
Billy Porter, actor and singer
September 22
Jeff Barry, baseball player
Mark Brisker, American-born Israeli basketball player
September 23
Jeff Cirillo, baseball player
Beth Saulnier, writer and editor
September 24
Chad Beguelin, playwright and lyricist
Chilly Willy, wrestler
Shawn "Clown" Crahan, rock percussionist for Slipknot
DeVante Swing, music producer
Megan Ward, actress
September 25
David Branshaw, golfer
Bill Simmons, sports columnist
Hal Sparks, actor, writer, comedian, and political commentator
September 26 – David Berri, University professor and sports economist
September 27 – Andrew Carroll, author, editor, playwright, public speaker, nonprofit executive, and historian
September 28
Manuel Benitez, actor and murderer (d. 2008)
Kerri Chandler, DJ and record producer
September 29
Allison Brennan, writer
O. J. Brigance, football player
Erika Eleniak, American-born Canadian model and actress
September 30
Julianna Baggott, University professor and novelist
John Carney, politician (d. 2021)
Silas Weir Mitchell, actor
Chris Von Erich, wrestler (d. 1991)


=== October ===

October 1
Jamie Bryant, football player and coach
Zach Galifianakis, actor and stand-up comedian
Jimmy Panetta, politician
October 2
Dan Barber, chef
Eddie Brown, football player and coach
Mitch English, actor and television host
October 3 – Gwen Stefani, singer, actress, and television host, lead singer for No Doubt
October 4
Abraham Benrubi, actor
Gil Cates Jr., actor, producer, and director
October 5
Salvatore Babones, sociologist
Brian Benczkowski, lawyer and politician
John Boccieri, politician
Jim Cox, politician
October 7
Bobbie Brown, actress, model, and beauty pageant contestant
Karen L. Nyberg, space engineer and astronaut
DJ Qbert, turntablist
October 8
Julia Ann, pornographic actress
Joe Baca Jr., politician
Bob D'Amico, drummer
Jeremy Davies, actor
October 10
Loren Bouchard, voice artist, animator, and producer
Grady Champion, blues singer/songwriter, guitarist, and harmonicist
Benjamin Crump, civil rights lawyer
Brett Favre, football player
Molly Kiely, cartoonist
Wendi McLendon-Covey, actress
October 12
Kevin Brooks, basketball player and coach
David Collins, Olympic rower
October 13
Rhett Akins, country singer
Scott Beason, radio host and politician
Artt Butler, voice actor
Tim Crabtree, baseball player
Nancy Kerrigan, figure skater
Cady McClain, actress and director
October 14
P. J. Brown, basketball player
Tim Burroughs, basketball player
David Strickland, screen actor (d. 1999)
October 15
J. J. Blair, musical engineer, producer, and musician
Bill Burke, middle-distance runner
Kim Raver, actress
October 16
Stephanie Best, middle-distance runner
Charles Brewer, boxer
Robert Cahaly, pollster and founder of the Trafalgar Group
Roy Hargrove, jazz trumpeter (d. 2018)
Wendy Wilson, singer and television personality
October 17
Tony Barton, high jumper
Theodore D. Chuang, judge
John Collins, artistic director
Joe Courtney, basketball player
Wood Harris, actor
Nancy Sullivan, actress
October 18 – Baby Bash, rapper
October 19
Vanessa Marshall, actress and voice artist
Trey Parker, voice artist, comedian, screenwriter, composer, director, and producer
October 20
Carole Crist, businesswoman
Juan González, baseball player
October 21
Derrick Carter, DJ and record producer
David Phelps, Christian music vocalist, songwriter, and vocal arranger
October 22
Dominic Black, wrestler
Spike Jonze, filmmaker
October 23
Reggie Barnes, football player
Roger Carter, stock car racing driver
Sanjay Gupta, neurosurgeon and medical reporter
October 24
Brian Boyer, basketball coach
Monica Brown, author
Christina Chambers, actress and model
October 25
Samantha Bee, Canadian-born comedian, writer, producer, political commentator, actress, and host
Cecil Castellucci, American-born Canadian novelist
Charles R. Chamberlain, political leader, executive director for Democracy for America
Nika Futterman, actress and voice artist
Alex Webster, death metal bassist
October 27
Murali Coryell, blues guitarist and singer
Jun Pino, artist and photographer
October 28
Kirk Bullinger, baseball player
Ben Harper, singer/songwriter
October 29 – Peter Breen, Olympic figure skater
October 31
Terry Boyd, basketball player
Ash Brannon, writer, director, visual artist, animator, and producer
Tim Chisholm, tennis player
David Coburn, actor


=== November ===

November 1
Gary Alexander, basketball player
Michael Benjamin, investor
Ron Clark, sprinter
November 2 – Reginald Arvizu, nu metal bassist for StillWell
November 3 – Myron Brown, basketball player
November 4
Trevor Blackwell, Canadian-born computer programmer, engineer, entrepreneur, and roboticist
Doug Boehm, record producer and sound engineer
Jimmy Carruth, basketball player
Matthew McConaughey, actor
P Diddy, rapper and entrepreneur
November 5
Mark Batterson, pastor and author
Deanna Bowen, American-born Canadian artist
Mark Calvi, basketball player and coach
November 7 – Michelle Clunie, actress and ballerina
November 8
Stephanie M. Carlson, developmental psychologist
Jason Couch, bowler
Jonathan Slavin, actor and activist
November 9
Sandra Denton, rapper
Allison Wolfe, punk rock singer/songwriter
November 10
Jennifer Cody, actress and dancer
Peter Craig, novelist and screenwriter
Ellen Pompeo, actress
November 11 – Mark Baker, basketball player and coach
November 12
Ian Bremmer, political scientist
Rob Schrab, actor and comic book creator
November 13
John Belluso, dramatist (d. 2006)
Lori Berenson, terrorist
Beth Bernstein, politician
Bob Bicknell, football player and coach
Stephen Full, actor and comedian
Josh Mancell, composer and instrumentalist
November 14
Daniel Abraham, novelist, author, screenwriter, and producer
Chad Blinman, music producer
Joseph Cella, diplomat and political advisor
Butch Walker, musician
November 15 – Matt Brown, politician
November 16 – David Taylor, politician
November 17
Roxanne Beckford, Jamaican-born actress
David Bell, author
November 18
Dan Bakkedahl, actor and comedian
Phil Buckman, musician and actor, bassist for Filter and Fuel
Demetrius Calip, basketball player (d. 2023)
Sam Cassell, basketball player and coach
Rocket Ismail, football player
Duncan Sheik, singer/songwriter, guitarist, and actor
November 19
Erika Alexander, actress
Arthur Bradford, writer and filmmaker
November 20
Dabo Swinney, football coach
Meredith Whitney, business executive
November 21 – Ken Griffey Jr., baseball player
November 22
Justin Constantine, Marine Lieutenant Colonel
Tony Palermo, drummer
November 23
Doug Brady, baseball player
Blaise Bryant, football player
November 26
KC Crosbie, politician
Kara Walker, artist
November 27
Vince Chhabria, judge
Myles Kennedy, singer/songwriter and guitarist, frontman for Alter Bridge
Elizabeth Marvel, actress
November 28
Michelle Beckley, politician
Dale Carter, football player
Colman Domingo, actor and dramatist
Lexington Steele, pornographic actor and director
November 29
Chris Baker, race car driver
Jennifer Elise Cox, actress
Kasey Keller, soccer player
Mariano Rivera, Panamanian-born baseball player
November 30
David Auburn, dramatist
Larry Brown, football player
Chris Weitz, director, screenwriter, producer, and actor


=== December ===

December 1
Stephen K. Benjamin, politician and businessman, mayor of Columbia, South Carolina (2010-2022) and director of the White House Office of Public Engagement (2023-2025)
Richard Carrier, historian
Amanda Chase, politician
December 2 – Lewis Bush, football player (d. 2011)
December 3 – Bill Blunden, author
December 4
J. Stewart Burns, writer and producer
Ferric Collons, football player
Jay-Z, rapper
December 5 – Alex Kapp Horner, actress
December 6
Kevin Birr, curler
Andrea Salinas, politician
December 7 – Patrice O'Neal, comedian and radio personality (d. 2011)
December 8
Kerry Earnhardt, race car driver
Steve Van Wormer, actor
December 9
Jakob Dylan, rock singer/songwriter and frontman for the Wallflowers
Lori Greiner, investor, entrepreneur, and television personality
December 10 – Austin Scott, politician
December 11
Stacey Blumer, Olympic freestyle skier
Sean Grande, basketball announcer
Max Martini, actor
December 12 – D-Shot, rapper
December 13 – Noam Bramson, politician
December 14
Dave Carnie, skateboarder and writer
Archie Kao, actor
December 15
Matt Brown, basketball player and coach
Marco Cacopardo, tennis player
Cool C, rapper
Rick Law, illustrator and producer
December 16
Jeff & Greg Burns, twin composers
Adam Riess, astrophysicist, recipient of Nobel Prize in Physics in 2011
December 17
Marty Carter, football player
Laurie Holden, actress, producer, model, and human rights activist
Chuck Liddell, mixed martial artist
December 18
Eddie Blake, football player
Marco Coleman, football player and coach
Joe Randa, baseball player and radio talk-show host
December 19
Michael Bates, football player and Olympic sprinter
Lauren Sánchez, news anchor
Kristy Swanson, actress
December 20
Jason F Beans, entrepreneur
Jim Carr, Vice President and Head of Standard Media Group LLC
Bobby Phills, basketball player (d. 2000)
December 21 – Julie Delpy, French-born actress
December 22
Rick Bertrand, politician
David Cote, writer
December 23
Jim Bankoff, media executive and co-founder, chairman, and CEO of Vox Media
Greg Biffle, race car driver
Martha Byrne, actress and singer
Rodney Culver, football player (d. 1996)
Rob Pelinka, sports agent
December 24
Brad Anderson, wrestler
Kevin Chown, rock bassist
Leavander Johnson, boxer (d. 2005)
Clinton McKinnon, rock saxophonist
Chen Yueling, Chinese-born race walker
Jonathan Zittrain, academic internet lawyer
Michael Zucchet, economist and politician, mayor of San Diego (2005)
December 25 – Wayde Butler, football player
December 27
Chyna, wrestler (d. 2016)
Sarah Vowell, historian, author, journalist, essayist, social commentator, and actress
December 28 – Katie Hobbs, politician, 24th Governor of Arizona (2023-present)
December 29
Mike Bagley, motorsports commentator
Matthew Berry, writer, columnist, fantasy sports analyst, and television personality
George Colligan, jazz musician
Jill Cordes, journalist
Patrick Fischler, actor
December 30
Joseph R. Bartlett, politician
Cade Courtley, television host and Navy SEAL
Dave England, stunt performer, television personality, and snowboarder
Matt Goldman, record producer
December 31
Christian Barranco, politician
Charlie Conrad, politician
Cool "Disco" Dan, graffiti artist (d. 2017)
Joyce Cooling, jazz musician


=== Full Date Unknown ===

Darrick Bachman, writer
Steven Baddour, politician
Nada Bakos, CIA analyst
Peter A. Balaskas, author
Vijay Balasubramanian, Indian-born University professor and theoretical physicist
Rob Balder, cartoonist and singer/songwriter
Lucian Ban, Romanian-born jazz pianist
C.C. Banana, music personality (d. 2012)
Roman Banks, basketball player and coach
Dora Barilla, healthcare strategist, executive, educator, and entrepreneur
Michael Barmada, University professor and geneticist (d. 2016)
Amy DuBois Barnett, magazine editor
Jarrett Barrios, politician
Danté Bartolomeo, politician
Emily Barton, novelist
Kyle Bass, investor and businessman
F. Kay Behm, judge
Mildred Beltre, activist
Marc Douglas Berardo, singer/songwriter
Tanyth Berkeley, photographer
Jeff Berkwits, science fiction editor
Leslie Berlin, historian
David Bernard, meteorologist
Jay M. Bernhardt, public health specialist and academic
Jeff Berry, baseball coach and sports agent
Jennifer Bertino-Tarrant, politician
Marta Bertoglio, politician
Reginald Bicha, social worker and government administrator
Big Boy, radio host
Big Herk, rapper
Andy Biggs, photographer
Michl Binderbauer, Austrian-born physicist and businessman
Jonathan Bird, cinematographer, photographer, director, and host
Jayme Lynn Blaschke, journalist and science fiction author
Fiona Bloom, music industry publicist
Clifton Bloomfield, serial killer
Charles Bock, writer
Tom Boellstorff, anthropologist
Christopher Boffoli, photographer
Dan Boneh, Israeli-born University professor
Boogie, Serbian-born photographer
Claria Horn Boom, judge
Susmita Bose, Indian-born scientist and engineer
Th-resa Bostick, bodybuilder
Caroline Boudreaux, businesswoman and social entrepreneur
Lisa Boulanger, neuroscientist
Geoff Bouvier, poet
Helen Boyd, author, academic, and activist
Mike Bradbury, basketball coach
Anthony Braga, University professor and criminologist
Nancy E. Brasel, judge
Rodric Bray, politician
Neil Brenner, University professor
Max Brody, musician
Celia Brooks Brown, chef
Brian P. Brooks, lawyer, banker, entrepreneur, technologist, and Comptroller of the Currency (2020-2021)
John W. Broomes, judge
Bill Brown, composer
Delia Brown, artist
Derrick Brown, computer scientist
Pete Brownell, businessman
Kathleen Buhle, writer
Alafair Burke, novelist
Stephen Burks, designer and University professor
Ambreen Butt, Pakistani-born artist
Mary Calvi, journalist
Julian Segura Camacho, author
Melani Cammett, political scientist
Buzz Campbell, singer/songwriter and guitarist
Rebecca Campbell, University professor
Thomas Campbell, filmmaker and visual artist
Cheryl Capezzuti, artist
Theodore Caplow, entrepreneur, environmental engineer, and inventor
Jim Capobianco, director, animator, and screenwriter
Chris Capossela, businessman, Chief Marketing Officer for Microsoft (2011-2023)
Brian Cappelletto, Scrabble player
Frank Carone, lawyer and politician
Pablo Carrillo, lawyer
Rebecca Carroll, writer, editor, and radio producer
Kathy Carter, soccer player and sports executive
Dave Chameides, steadicam operator and director
Tina Chang, poet, professor, editor, organizer, and public speaker
Mark Changizi, cognitive scientist
Tim Chartier, mathematician
Semi Chellas, filmmaker
Jennifer Chiaverini, author
Chilly Chill, hip hop producer
Jennifer Choe-Groves, lawyer and judge
Susan Choi, novelist
Tiffany Chung, Vietnamese-born artist
Monique Chyba, control theorist and University professor
Susan Cianciolo, fashion designer and artist
Samuel J. Clark, demographer
Christina Cogdell, art historian and educator
Jonathan Cohn, author and journalist
Kevin Cokley, University professor
David Coleman, businessman and educator
Melissa Coleman, author and columnist
Robin R. Means Coleman, author, communication scholar, and educator
Mike Colona, attorney and politician
Dalton Conley, University professor and sociologist
Venicia Considine, politician
Jason Corder, producer, scriptwriter, actor, singer, and composer
William Cordova, Peruvian-born artist
John Corvino, philosopher
Kristen Cox, writer and politician
Cedric Crear, politician and businessman
Carolyn Creedon, poet
Omar Cunningham, blues singer
Jon Cutler, musician
Scott Cutler, business executive and CEO of HealthEquity
Raissa D'Souza, University professor
Max Gottlieb, producer, production designer, screenwriter, and director
Julie Kent, ballerina
Julie Myers, lawyer and assistant secretary for ICE (2006-2008)
Jennifer Oakes, poet, novelist, and teacher


== Deaths ==


== See also ==
List of American films of 1969
Timeline of United States history (1950–1969)


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to 1969 in the United States at Wikimedia Commons