Adolescence is a British television psychological crime drama series created by Jack Thorne and Stephen Graham and directed by Philip Barantini. It centres on a 13-year-old schoolboy, Jamie Miller (Owen Cooper), who is arrested after the murder of a girl in his school. Each of its episodes was shot in one continuous take.
Adolescence premiered on Netflix on 13 March 2025, to critical acclaim for its directing, writing, and cinematography, with special attention paid to its atmosphere and performances. Adolescence was the first streaming show to place at the top of the Barb Audiences weekly television ratings, and received thirteen nominations at the 77th Primetime Emmy Awards, winning for Outstanding Limited or Anthology Series and Outstanding Directing for a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie for Barantini, in addition to acting wins for Lead Actor (Graham), Supporting Actor (Cooper), and Supporting Actress (Erin Doherty).
On 9 April 2025, Deadline Hollywood reported that Netflix and Plan B Entertainment were in talks about creating a second season.


== Premise ==
In a town in the Doncaster area in Yorkshire, England, armed police raid a family home and arrest Jamie Miller, a 13-year-old boy, on suspicion of the murder of his classmate Katie Leonard, who the viewers later learn had rejected his advances and then cyberbullied him. Jamie is processed and held at a police station for questioning and then remanded in custody at a secure training centre. Investigations at Jamie's school and interviews by a forensic psychologist uncover Jamie's views towards women associated with the manosphere and mockery he has received on social media. At home, Jamie's family deals with the community's backlash against them as they work together to cope with Jamie's arrest and subsequent detention.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main ===
Stephen Graham as Eddie Miller
Ashley Walters as DI Luke Bascombe
Faye Marsay as DS Misha Frank
Mark Stanley as Paul Barlow
Christine Tremarco as Manda Miller
Owen Cooper as Jamie Miller
Amélie Pease as Lisa Miller
Hannah Walters as Mrs Bailey
Jo Hartley as Mrs Fenumore
Fatima Bojang as Jade
Kaine Davis as Ryan Kowalska
Amari Bacchus as Adam Bascombe
Erin Doherty as Briony Ariston


=== Guest ===
Emilia Holliday as Katie Leonard
Lewis Pemberton as Tommy
Austin Haynes as Fredo
Adam Khan as Tau
Charlie McSweeney as Shaun
Alfie Ward as Moray
Elodie Grace Walker as Georgie
Amelia Minto as Billie
Douglas Russell as Victor
Connor Calland as Evan


== Episodes ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Adolescence was originally conceived by Stephen Graham as a response to cases of knife crime by male teenagers in the United Kingdom, including the then-recent (2021 and 2023) murders of Ava White, Elianne Andam, and Brianna Ghey. He decided to create a drama exploring the motivation of extreme acts of violence against girls by young boys, and collaborated with screenwriter Jack Thorne. Thorne has stated that no part of the drama is based on a specific true story. Speaking on BBC Radio 4's arts programme Front Row, Thorne stated that the two writers wanted to "look in the eye of modern male rage" and examine the influence of public figures such as Andrew Tate on boys.
The series was announced in March 2024 with the working title Adolescence to be written by Jack Thorne and Stephen Graham. It is a four-part limited crime drama told in a real-time, one-shot style, with Philip Barantini as director. Barantini and Graham previously collaborated on Boiling Point (2021), which was also shot in one take. Warp Films, Matriarch Productions and Plan B Entertainment produced the series for Netflix. Jo Johnson is series producer, and Graham, Thorne and Barantini are executive producers alongside Mark Herbert, Emily Feller, Hannah Walters, Brad Pitt, Jeremy Kleiner, Dede Gardner and Nina Wolarsky.


=== Casting ===
Owen Cooper was cast in the role of the teenage murder suspect, Jamie Miller, at the age of 13, with no previous professional acting experience. Casting director Shaheen Baig had considered 500 boys for the part, but Cooper attracted her attention after sending her a demo tape and secured the role. Baig found Cooper and several of the other young cast members through Drama MOB in Manchester and Articulate Drama School and Agency in Bradford. Staff members of these drama schools, which serve students from underrepresented and deprived communities, resented the narrative that these actors had "done nothing and came from nowhere" prior to this production.


=== Filming ===
Graham, Owen Cooper, Ashley Walters, and Erin Doherty star. Filming began in the United Kingdom in July 2024 and finished around October 2024.
Adolescence is noted for its extensive use of one-shot filming, as each episode is shot in one take by cinematographer Matthew Lewis. Shooting was planned through multiple rehearsals building up to full technical run-throughs, during which the director of photography would plan camera movements. Each one-hour episode was shot around 10 times, with two takes per day. Episodes were shown as completed in one take, with no cuts nor blending of shots together with CGI. Graham said that each episode took three weeks in total. The takes used were as follows: first episode, 2nd take; second episode, 13th take; third episode, 12th take; fourth episode, 16th take. The episodes were not shot in chronological order: Cooper's first day on set was shooting episode 3.
Filming locations for Adolescence included South Kirkby, South Elmsall and Sheffield in Yorkshire. Minsthorpe Community College in South Elmsall was used as a location for the school scenes in episode 2, filmed over 1 week during 2024's summer. The interior scenes at the police station were shot at a specially constructed film set at the Production Park studio facility in South Kirkby in order to accommodate the complexities of single-shot filming.


== Release ==
The series was released on Netflix on 13 March 2025. It became the most watched streaming television show in the United Kingdom in a single week, beating the record set by the Netflix series Fool Me Once in January 2024.
Adolescence has seen significant viewership success on Netflix following its release. In its first three weeks, the series garnered 96.7 million views on the platform. For the week ending 30 March 2025, it recorded 30.4 million views and ranked in the top 10 most-watched lists across all 93 countries tracked by Netflix's top 10 metrics. This performance has placed Adolescence ninth on Netflix's all-time viewership list, which is based on viewership data collected over the first 91 days of a title's availability.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
Adolescence has been widely praised by critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 97% of 112 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 9/10. The website's consensus reads: "Stylistically bold and beautifully acted from top to bottom, Adolescence is a masterclass in televisual storytelling and a searing viewing experience that scars." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, calculated a score of 91 out of 100, based on 29 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim".
Writing in The Guardian, Lucy Mangan stated that Adolescence was "the closest thing to TV perfection in decades", singling out the acting by Cooper and Doherty for particular praise. Nandini Balial of RogerEbert.com also praised Cooper's acting for capturing "the quicksilver nature of those fraught years between childhood and adulthood". Anita Singh of The Daily Telegraph found the series to be "quietly devastating" and the acting to be "phenomenal", although she said that the single-take filming technique could feel "like a gimmick". Sophie Butcher of Empire praised the continuous shooting, stating that it was "the most dizzying TV feat of the year" which served to enhance the on-screen emotion.
Adolescence was the first streaming show to place at the top of the Barb Audiences weekly television ratings.


=== Political impact ===

According to The Guardian, the show highlights the ways in which the manosphere has affected adolescent boys, with characters directly naming Andrew Tate and the "red pill" community as key influences on Jamie and other boys his age. Anneliese Midgley, a Member of Parliament, called for the series to be screened to Parliament and in schools, claiming it could help counter misogyny and violence against women and girls. Prime Minister Keir Starmer backed the call, writing on Twitter, "As a father, watching Adolescence with my teenage son and daughter hit home hard." The show was made free for viewing in UK secondary schools after Starmer's backing.
In March 2025, businessman and Trump administration advisor Elon Musk labeled the show as "anti-white propaganda" owing to the casting a white actor to portray Jamie. The theory alleged that the show was based on the 2024 Southport stabbings, and that depicting the perpetrator as white was an intentional choice to demonise white people. Co-writer Jack Thorne called the claim "ridiculous" and stated that the television series was inspired by but not directly based on any real-life events. The show itself was written several months prior to the Southport attack, though the attack occurred early during filming, before episode 2 (the show was not filmed chronologically).


=== Accolades ===
Owen Cooper, for his performance as teen murderer Jamie Miller, won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie, making him the youngest male winner in the history of the Primetime Emmy Awards, in 2025.


== See also ==
Sharp Objects (miniseries) – 2018 American Southern Gothic psychological thriller television miniseries
Age of criminal responsibility – Minimum age of a child committed crime
Online Safety Act 2023 – UK law to regulate online content
Sex differences in crime – Differences between men and women as the perpetrators or victims of crime


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Adolescence on Netflix 
Adolescence at IMDb