Artemis III is planned to be the first crewed Moon landing mission of the Artemis program and the first crewed flight of the Starship HLS lander. Artemis III is planned to be the second crewed Artemis mission and the first crewed lunar landing since Apollo 17 in December 1972. 
As of December 2024, NASA had officially expected Artemis III to launch no earlier than mid-2027 but due to heat shield issues on Orion and delays in the development of Starship, NASA officials expressed an openness to flying Artemis III without a crewed landing. Valve problems were identified in the spacecraft's life support system.
The mission may become a crewed visit to the Lunar Gateway.  In April 2024, it was reported that alternative mission options being internally evaluated by NASA include a test of docking between Orion and the SpaceX Starship HLS in low Earth orbit. Due to the second Trump administration's fiscal year 2026 budget proposal, which involves major budget cuts for NASA, Artemis III could be the final mission to use the Space Launch System and Orion spacecraft.


== Overview ==
The goal of Artemis III is to land a crew at the Moon's south polar region. The mission would see two astronauts land on the surface of the Moon for a stay of about one week. According to NASA, total mission duration including flights will be about 30 days. While up to four astronauts would launch aboard Orion, only two would land on the surface aboard Starship HLS, with the others remaining aboard Orion. Four spacewalks are planned for two astronauts. 
The suite of planned scientific observations includes sampling lunar water ice. Before the Artemis III landing, some additional equipment will be pre-positioned on the surface, including an unpressurized rover for astronauts to use during their lunar excursions. This rover will have the capability to be controlled remotely. Several permanently shadowed regions could be reached by short forays of 5 to 15 km (3.1 to 9.3 mi), well within the range of the rover.


== Spacecraft ==


=== Space Launch System ===

The Space Launch System is a super-heavy-lift launcher used to launch the Orion spacecraft from Earth to a trans-lunar orbit. This will be the final mission using the booster SLS Block 1, the design used for the first three missions. Afterward, from Artemis IV until Artemis VIII, missions will use SLS Block 1B, with a more capable Exploration Upper Stage, and a cargo hold to transport other payloads.


=== Orion ===

Orion is the crew transport vehicle used by all Artemis missions. It will transport the crew from Earth to lunar orbit, dock with Starship HLS, and return the crew to Earth.


=== Starship HLS, depot, and tankers ===

After a multi-phase design effort, on April 16, 2021, NASA selected SpaceX to develop Starship HLS and deliver it to near-rectilinear halo orbit (NRHO) prior to arrival of the crew for use on the Artemis III mission. The delivery requires that Starship HLS be refueled in Earth orbit before boosting to the NRHO, and this refueling requires a pre-positioned propellant depot in Earth orbit that is filled by multiple (at least 14) tanker flights. Two astronauts will transfer from Orion to Starship HLS, which will descend to the lunar surface and sustain them for several days before returning them to Orion. Following the return of the astronauts, Starship HLS will be disposed of by sending it into heliocentric orbit.
In October 2025, NASA opened up bidding for the moon landing contract to other companies due to delays encountered by SpaceX in developing a lunar lander.


== Development ==

Upon the December 2017 ratification of the Trump administration's Space Policy Directive 1, a crewed lunar campaign – later known as the Artemis program – using the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle (MPCV) and a space station in lunar orbit was established. Originally billed as Exploration Mission-3 (EM-3), the goal of the mission was to send four astronauts into a near-rectilinear halo orbit around the Moon and deliver the ESPRIT and U.S. Utilization Module to the lunar space station, known as the Gateway. 
By May 2019 however, ESPRIT and the U.S. Utilization Module – now called HALO – were re-manifested to fly separately on a commercial launch vehicle. Artemis III, as it was now billed, was repurposed to accelerate the first crewed lunar landing of the Artemis program by the end of 2024, with a profile that would have seen the Orion MPCV rendezvous with a minimal Gateway space station made up of only the Power and Propulsion Element and a small habitat/docking node with an attached commercially-procured lunar lander known as the Human Landing System (HLS).
By early 2020, plans for Orion and the HLS to rendezvous with the Gateway were abandoned in favour of direct docking of Orion and HLS, and delivery of the Gateway after Artemis III.
On August 10, 2021, an Office of Inspector General audit reported a conclusion that the spacesuits would not be ready until April 2025 at the earliest, likely delaying the mission from the planned late 2024 launch date. Axiom Space will design the space suits, with collaboration from fashion house Prada.
On November 9, 2021, the Administrator of NASA, Bill Nelson, confirmed that Artemis III will launch no earlier than 2025.
In June 2023, Jim Free, NASA's associate administrator for exploration systems development, said that launch would "probably" be no earlier than 2026. Later in December 2023, the GAO reported the mission was unlikely to occur before 2027.
In January 2024, NASA officially delayed Artemis III to no earlier than September 2026.
On its third test flight Starship reached its desired orbital trajectory for the first time on March 14, 2024.
In March 2024, NASA announced the scientific instruments to be included on the mission were a compact, autonomous seismometer suite called the Lunar Environment Monitoring Station, or LEMS. LEMS will characterize the regional structure of the Moon's crust and mantle to inform the development of lunar formation and evolution models. Another instrument is Lunar Effects on Agricultural Flora, a.k.a. LEAF, which will investigate the impact of the lunar surface environment on space crops. The third instrument is the Lunar Dielectric Analyzer, or LDA, an internationally contributed payload that will measure the regolith's ability to propagate an electric field.
The European Service Module for the mission was completed and delivered to NASA in September 2024.
In December 2024, NASA officially delayed Artemis III to no earlier than 2027.
On May 2, 2025, the second Trump administration released its fiscal year 2026 budget proposal, which proposed canceling the SLS and Orion spacecraft after Artemis III due to the former's cost of $4 billion per launch.
On August 18, 2025, NASA reported that it had begun processing the SLS core stage's completed bottom fifth (to which the engines will be attached) at the Kennedy Space Center's Vehicle Assembly Building, while the rest of the core stage, nearing completion at Michoud Assembly Facility, was due to be shipped out in mid-2026.


== See also ==

List of Artemis missions
List of missions to the Moon


== References ==


== External links ==

Orion website at nasa.gov
Space Launch System website at nasa.gov
Artemis iii at nasa.gov