Banglavision (Bengali: বাংলাভিশন) is a Bangladeshi Bengali-language satellite and cable television channel owned by Shyamol Bangla Media Limited, commencing official broadcasts on 31 March 2006. Its name is a portmanteau of "bangla" and "television". Banglavision is based in Bir Uttam C.R. Dutta Road in Banglamotor, Dhaka.


== History ==
Banglavision applied for a broadcasting license on 30 May 2004, which the Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission granted them on 31 January 2005. On the same day, Boishakhi Television and Channel 1 have also received their licenses. Banglavision has also received the ability to broadcast internationally. The channel commenced test transmissions on 25 December 2005 at 18:00 (BST), and officially began broadcasting on 31 March 2006 with the "Drishti Jure Desh" (দৃষ্টি জুড়ে দেশ; lit. 'Country across the vision') slogan, with its objective to showcase the Bengali culture to audiences. Banglavision originally broadcast via the Telstar 10 satellite, but later switched to broadcasting using Apstar-7. It later began broadcasting via the Bangabandhu-1 satellite.
In 2010, Banglavision premiered Lal Golap, a magazine show hosted by Shafik Rehman, after being moved from BTV. Banglavision was urged by the government not to broadcast a three-part documentary series on a hangman in December 2010 due to fears that it could frighten children. On 12 March 2012, cable operators in many areas around Bangladesh have imposed a temporary blackout on Banglavision, along with the unrelated Ekushey Television, after both channels have reported on a BNP rally in detail. Banglavision began airing the Kache Ashar Golpo telefilms on 14 February 2014. On the occasion of the month of Ramadan, Banglavision was one of the eight television channels to broadcast the cooking series Pran Premium Ghee Star Cook in July 2014.
Banglavision was one of the nine Bangladeshi television channels to sign an agreement with Bdnews24.com to subscribe to a video-based news agency run by children called Prism in May 2016. On 1 December 2024, Lal Golap began airing again on the channel after being off-air from 16 April 2016. Banglavision is one of the Bangladeshi channels whose YouTube channels were geo-blocked in India on 9 May 2025, citing threat to national security concerns during the 2025 India–Pakistan conflict.


== Programming ==
Banglavision's programming is diversified, consisting of drama, news, music, and much more.


=== List of programming ===
Agamir Kantho
Amar Ami
Article 39
Bhodropara
Bou Dour
Broken Family
Common Problem
Ebong Class-er Baire
Fifty-Fifty
Ghorey Bairey
Gulshan Avenue
Harkipte
Jamai Mela
Kache Ashar Golpo
Khelowar
Lal Golap
Lucky Thirteen
Music Club
Ronger Dunia
Shunyo Pata


== See also ==
List of television stations in Bangladesh


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website