Doraemon (ドラえもん, Doraemon) is a Japanese anime television series based on Fujiko F. Fujio's manga of the same name and is the first adaptation in the media franchise. The series, produced by Nippon TeleMovie Productions, originally aired in Japan on NNS from April 1 to September 30, 1973.


== Premise ==
Doraemon follows the title character, a cat-like robot, who travels from the future to take care for a young child called Nobita and guide him in the right route for the near future.


== Cast and characters ==

The voice cast was determined in cooperation with Aoni Production and Theatre Echo.

Kōsei Tomita (episodes 1-13), Masako Nozawa (episodes 14-26) as Doraemon
Yoshiko Ohta as Nobita Nobi
Masako Ebisu as Shizuka Minamoto
Shun Yashiro as Suneo Honekawa
Kaneta Kimotsuki as Takeshi "Gian" Goda
Noriko Ohara as Tamako Nobi
Ichirō Murakoshi as Nobisuke Nobi
Toshiya Ueda, Kazue Takahashi as Mrs. Honekawa
Osamu Katou, Sanji Hase as Mr. Honekawa
Masashi Amenomori, Osamu Katou, as Mr. Ganari (Sensei)
Masayuki Tatekabe as Sasuke Goda
Keiko Yokoyama as Michiko Minamoto
Shinichi Kimotsuki as Yoshio Minamoto
Keiko Yamamoto as Sewashi Nobi
Keiko Yokozawa as Mii-chan
Masako Nozawa as Botako
Junko Hori as Gachako
Noriko Tsukase as Damako
Rihoko Yoshida as Jamako


== Production and broadcast ==


=== Development ===
The origins of the first adaptation of Doraemon are thought to have been planned by Masami Niikura, then-president of Nippon Television. Hiroshi Igawa, the editor-in-chief of the manga Shogaku Ninensei, was approached by a producer from Nippon Television Network, who suggested manga such as "Mother Star" and "Doraemon," the latter of which was subsequently picked.


=== Broadcast ===
The series was broadcast between April 1 to September 30, 1973 on Nippon Television. 26 episodes, divided into 52 individual segments were produced. A pilot film was produced in 1972 and shown to test audiences in January 1973. The audience included Doraemon creator Fujiko F. Fujio. They initially approved of the show, but when they were shown the progress, they were apparently angered by the fact that they changed Nobita and Doraemon's personalities. 
Many of the episodes produced for the series were either TV-exclusive episodes and subsequently never remade, or manga chapters which have since the 1973 series not been readapted for the later anime shows.
The show was frequently rebroadcast throughout the 1970s. The station, Toyama Television, was the last to air the show, airing from July 3 to July 24, 1981, and briefly again in August of that year. The station aired the show in individual segments. On August 3, the publisher of the Doraemon manga requested the station to cease airing the show, to make sure the reputation of the more famous and longer-running 1979 series wasn't harmed, as well as to not confuse children watching between both versions. The animation crew of the show, Nippon TeleMovie Productions, went bankrupt in 1981. Before they went defunct, they attempted to cover the debt by selling off the masters of the 1973 series, The Japanese post-production company IMAGICA, discovered episodes 18 and 20 through 26 in their archive, as well as segments 5A, 10B and 12B.
In 2003, the production chief of the show, Hiroshi Shimozaki, now going under the name Masami Jun or "mcsammy", came forward with several episodes and rush reels (raw footage). He later uploaded low-quality versions of the intro and credits to his site on a members-only and password-protected page, however, a few minutes after the upload, he was told that the intro and credits were uploaded to Japanese anonymous board site 2channel. He immediately removed the video files from his site, but it was already too late. Many images of his episodes were uploaded to GeoCities. In the late 1990s, a person came forward with a VHS recording of the episode "Crazy Stomach Clock", dated from 1978. Audio clips from the episode were uploaded, but the site they were hosted on was removed. In 2015, a YouTube user discovered a clip playing on a television set in a Japanese pornographic film from the 1970s.
Due to its rarity and obscurity, it is nearly impossible to find information on this version of Doraemon. No episodes exist online or on home media, besides an audio recording of the final episode. The only footage currently available is Jun's uploads of the opening and ending, however the footage is of very low quality (240p 193 kbit/s video, 128 kbit/s audio). Other footages currently available from this series are the aforementioned clip from said pornographic film above as well as the preview for episode 3.


== Episodes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Doraemon (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Doraemon (1973 TV series) Design Works
Doraemon (1973 TV series) at IMDb