First Baltic channel (Latvian: Pirmais Baltijas kanāls; abbreviated PBK; Russian: Первый Балтийский канал, romanized: Pervyy Baltiyskiy kanal) was a Baltic pay television channel based on the largest Russian Channel One to broadcast its programs in the Baltic states. It was launched on 4 September 2002. The channel had also broadcast the local news programme Latvian time (Russian: Латвийское время) since June 2003.
The channel was closed in Latvia on 26 October 2021 due to misinformation about COVID-19 and two other violations. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022, its license was revoked and the channel was effectively banned in all three Baltic States.


== Other channels ==


=== First Baltic music channel ===
First Baltic music channel (Latvian: Pirmais Baltijas muzikālais kanāls; Russian: Первый Балтийский музыкальный канал) was a Russian-language music television channel launched in 2005. The channel broadcast in Estonia, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, Russia and Ukraine. The channel ceased broadcasting on 1 November 2017 and was replaced by Dom Kino.


=== First Baltic channel Estonia ===
First Baltic channel Estonia (Estonian: Pervõi Baltiiski Kanal; Russian: Первый Балтийский канал Эстония) was an Estonian Russian-language television channel launched in 2002.
First Baltic channel Estonia co-operated with the news portal Delfi and the newspaper MK-Estonia. Delfi portal also offered news bulletins of the programme Estonian News (Russian: Новости Эстонии) for viewing.
On 20 April 2021, the Latvian version of PBK Estonia was launched.
The Latvian version of PBK Estonia ceased broadcasting on 2 March 2022 due to the revocation of its broadcasting licence.


=== First Baltic channel Lithuania ===
First Baltic channel Lithuania (Lithuanian: Pirmasis Baltijos kanalas; Russian: Первый Балтийский канал Литва) was a Lithuanian Russian-language television channel launched in 2002.
On 15 October 2013, broadcasting of this channel in Lithuania was suspended by court decision for three months due to broadcasting of the program "Man and the Law" (in Russian: Человек и  закон) with a report on January events of 1991 in which the attack by the Soviet army and special units was denied. Jolanta Butkevičienė, chairman of the board of BMA Lietuva apologised to residents of Lithuania for "a program about the bitter events of 13 January 1991 that offended the civil feelings of every Lithuanian for the whole country".
Channel broadcasting in Lithuania was resumed on 15 January 2014, but the program "Man and the Law" is no longer broadcast in Lithuania and other Baltic countries.
On 25 February 2022, the channel broadcasting in Lithuania was suspended for a period of three years due to warmongering and spreading Russian propaganda.
The Latvian version of PBK Lithuania was launched on 1 October 2021 to broadcast its programs from Russian NTV channel, however the channel ceased broadcasting on 2 March 2022 due to revocation of its broadcasting licence.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website of First Baltic channel at the Wayback Machine (archived 20 September 2021)