Gramedia TV is a defunct Indonesian local private digital terrestrial television station owned by KG Media under Kompas Gramedia. The station was licensed to begin operating in 2014 based the bookstore same name. but only started broadcasting after the government conducted a digital broadcast trial on June 15, 2016. This TV station remains relatively unknown due to minimal publicity. The majority of its programming is entertainment programming previously aired on Kompas TV.
Since July 31, 2023, the broadcast itself has disappeared for reasons that are still unclear, and cannot be enjoyed using other alternative media because it is only broadcast on digital broadcasts.


== History ==
The presence of Gramedia TV (originally planned to be called Kompas Gramedia Televisi, abbreviated KGTV) first appeared in 2011, following  Ministry of Communication and Digital Affairs protests will operate Kompas TV. At that time, Kompas TV did not yet have the status of a private television station and only identified itself as a content provider. In fact, PT Gramedia Media Nusantara had been established since 2008. Gramedia TV was originally intended to be the parent of Kompas TV's network television, and would broadcast using a digital broadcast system. However, due to the lack of digital broadcasting, the plan stalled, and PT Gramedia Media Nusantara eventually became the legal entity/business entity for Kompas TV as a content provider. As the parent company of the Kompas TV network, it then became KTV, and finally in 2015 managed to acquire its parent company by purchasing the license for tvPlus! (PT Cipta Megaswara Televisi). However, Kompas Gramedia appears to have retained the Gramedia TV concept, but now as an entertainment television station. PT Gramedia Media Nusantara subsequently ceased to be Kompas TV's legal entity and returned to its original concept, Gramedia TV.
Initially, this television station was broadcast on TVRI Jakarta's digital multiplex with 1080i HD picture quality. Then, from early 2021 to 2022, Gramedia TV (along with Kompas TV and KTV) moved to Trans Media's multiplex and changed its format to SD 576i with letterboxing like when Kompas TV first broadcast, and in March 2022, KTV and Gramedia TV also appeared on RTV's multiplex. Throughout its broadcasting period, this television station only broadcast in Greater Jakarta (Jabodetabek), although in 2015 there were also plans to expand to Makassar under the PT Digital Inspirasi Indonesia network and to Aceh under PT Kompas TV Aceh-Bangka. At that time, it was planned that Gramedia TV would have programs targeted at women and children, as well as being educational and prioritizing local wisdom.


== References ==