The Hollywood Walk of Fame is a landmark that consists of more than 2,800 five-pointed terrazzo-and-brass stars embedded in the sidewalks along fifteen blocks of Hollywood Boulevard and three blocks of Vine Street in the Hollywood district of Los Angeles, California. The stars are monuments to achievement in the entertainment industry and bear the names of a mix of actors, filmmakers, musicians, inventors, businessmen, fictional characters, and more.
The original idea for the Walk of Fame came in 1953, the first stars were unveiled in 1958, and the first permanent stars were placed in 1960. The Walk has been expanded on multiple fronts since then, including the number of stars displayed; categories, entities, and organizations honored; and blocks covered. The Walk also deteriorated while it was expanded, and a long-term restoration plan began in 2008.
The Walk of Fame is administered by the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce and maintained by the self-financing Hollywood Historic Trust. The Chamber collects fees ($85,000 as of 2025) from each new honoree's sponsor, which fund the creation and installation of their star as well as maintenance for the Walk as a whole. The Chamber also owns the Walk's trademark and licensing rights.
The Walk of Fame is one of Los Angeles's most popular tourist attractions, receiving an estimated ten million annual visitors in 2010.


== Description ==
The Walk of Fame spans 1.3 miles (2.1 km) on Hollywood Boulevard between Gower Street and La Brea Avenue, and 0.4 miles (0.64 km) on Vine Street between Yucca Street and Sunset Boulevard. An additional short segment runs diagonally between Hollywood and La Brea on Marshfield Way.

As of November 2025, the Walk consists of 2,827 stars, all but one of which are placed in the ground, the vast majority in the sidewalk at 6-foot (1.8 m) intervals. The stars are five-point, coral-pink terrazzo rimmed with brass and inlaid into a 3-by-3-foot (0.91 by 0.91 m) charcoal-colored terrazzo background. The honoree's name is inlaid in brass block letters in the upper portion of each star, and below the name, a round inlaid brass emblem indicates the category of the honoree's contributions. Stars face east or west on Hollywood Boulevard and north or south on Vine Street so that pedestrians walking either direction will have stars facing them. 
The Walk also contains hundreds of blank stars, each serving as a placeholder for a future honoree.


=== Categorization ===
The Walk of Fame honors entertainment industry contributions in six categories and every nominee must fit into one of them. The six categories and their emblems are:

A seventh "special category" also exists for the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce to directly honor individuals, organizations, and corporations.
The categories are not represented equally. As of October 2025, 44% of all stars were in the motion pictures category, 25% in television, 19% in audio recording or music, 9% in radio, fewer than 3% in theater/live performance, and fewer than 1% in sports entertainment and the "special category" combined. Each star represents one category; therefore if an individual has been honored in more than one category, that person will have more than one star.


=== Alternative designs ===

Special category stars display emblems unique to those honored. Many of these stars honor those important to Los Angeles, for example: former mayor Tom Bradley, whose emblem shows the seal of Los Angeles; the Los Angeles Police Department, whose emblem shows a Hollywood Division badge; KTLA, whose emblem shows a satellite dish, and the Los Angeles Times, whose emblem shows a former Los Angeles Times building. Some stars, such as those for Victoria's Secret, Los Angeles Dodgers, Screen Actors Guild, and Recording Academy display the honored organization's logo.
"Friends of the Walk of Fame" monuments are also part of the Walk. These monuments consist of charcoal terrazzo squares rimmed by miniature pink terrazzo stars that display all category emblems except Sports Entertainment, as no "Friends of the Walk of Fame" monuments have been unveiled since Sports Entertainment was added. In addition to the emblems, these monuments also contain the sponsor's name, logo, and contribution in inlaid brass block lettering.
Unlike the rest of the Walk, the Apollo 11 entries are not stars; they are circular moons. These monuments also contain text beyond the honorees' names, specifically they contain the date of the moon landing and "Apollo XI". The Walk contains four of these monuments, one on each corner of Hollywood and Vine.


=== Star locations ===

The blocks outside Grauman's Chinese Theatre and Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel are considered the prime locations for stars. Stars of particularly well-known celebrities are often placed in front of the Chinese, Oscar winners' stars near Dolby Theatre, and Disney-related stars outside or near El Capitan Theatre. Family members and co-stars are usually placed near each other.
Some stars are located outside businesses related to the individual the star honors. Examples include Ray Bradbury and John Waters, whose stars were placed outside Larry Edmunds Bookshop, which they frequented; Tim Burton, whose star was placed outside Hollywood Toys & Costumes, a business he credits as one of his childhood inspirations; and Alfred Hitchcock, whose star was placed outside Fox Hollywood, a theater that was showing his film Psycho at the time of the unveiling.
Locations are occasionally chosen for ironic or humorous reasons: Mike Myers's star was placed outside an adult store called the International Love Boutique, an association with his Austin Powers roles; Roger Moore's and Daniel Craig's are located at 7007 Hollywood Boulevard in recognition of their roles in James Bond 007 films; Ed O'Neill's was placed outside a shoe store in reference to his character's occupation on Married ... with Children; Steve Guttenberg's was placed outside the Police Activities League in reference to his role in the Police Academy franchise; and The Dead End Kids' are located at the end of the Walk, where it "dead ends".
Honorees may request a location for their star, although the final decision is made by the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce. Jay Leno, for example, requested his star be near Hollywood and Highland because he was twice picked up by police for vagrancy at that intersection. George Carlin requested his star be placed in front of the KDAY radio station, where he first gained national recognition. Lin-Manuel Miranda requested a site in front of the Pantages Theatre, where his musicals In The Heights and Hamilton had played. Michael Jackson refused to attend his star's unveiling unless it was located outside Grauman's Chinese; the Chamber acquiesced to his demand. Carol Burnett explained her choice in her memoir: while working as an usherette at Warner Brothers Theatre, she advised a couple arriving during the final few minutes of a showing to wait for the next showing, to avoid seeing and spoiling the ending. The theater manager fired her on the spot for "insubordination" and humiliated her by stripping the epaulets from her uniform. Twenty-six years later, at her request, Burnett's star was placed in front of the theater.


=== Other elements ===

In addition to stars, the Walk consists of several other elements. Hollywood and La Brea Gateway, also known as Four Ladies of Hollywood, is a gazebo sculpture meant to pay tribute to the multi-ethnic women of the entertainment industry. This structure consists of a square stainless steel Art Deco-style open-roof gazebo, the corners of which feature life-size caryatids of Dorothy Dandridge, Anna May Wong, Dolores del Río, and Mae West, each standing on a square base and wearing a glamourous gown. The gazebo's roof is rounded and supports a circular dome, the dome topped by a central spire with descending neon block letters spelling "Hollywood" on each side. Atop the spire is a small gilded weather vane-style sculpture of Marilyn Monroe in her billowing skirt pose from The Seven Year Itch.
The gazebo, designed by Catherine Hardwicke, was installed at the Walk's western end in 1993 and dedicated on February 1, 1994. It has been described as "creative and wonderful" and also "depressingly awful". Hardwicke contends that critics missed the humor and symbolism of the piece.
The Hollywood Walk of Fame Mural is a 100-foot (30 m) mixed-media mural made to celebrate the Walk's 60th anniversary and the Chamber's 100th. The mural is meant to tell "a comprehensive story of the history of Walk of Fame from its creation to its persistence..." and also "captur[e] the ages, the diversity and the beauty of the Walk of Fame and its recipients..." It was created by Ian Robertson-Salt, curated by Art Share LA, and unveiled on June 11, 2021.
Another Walk of Fame element is its time capsule. This capsule, which commemorates the Walk's 50th anniversary, was buried below a specially-designed star near Hollywood and Highland in 2017. The capsule contains more than fifty items, including a signed picture of Joanne Woodward, a piece of Elvis Presley's star, a replica of the Capitol Records building, Emmy award memorabilia, an assortment of DVDs, the script for Casablanca, playbills from The Pantages, news articles about the Walk of Fame, a note from Bob Barker, and more. It is scheduled to be opened in 2060.

Some stars are accompanied by plaques about the star or its recipient. For example, a plaque below Bob Hope's live performance star honors him as Hollywood's Citizen of the Century, a designation he was given when the star was re-dedicated for his 100th birthday; a plaque below Gene Autry's live performance star, his fifth star awarded, notes that he is the only individual honored in all (at the time) five categories; and a plaque below Jennifer Lopez's star recognizes it as the 2,500th star unveiled. Additionally, all stars unveiled in 2010 have a 50th anniversary plaque below them.


== Administration ==
The Hollywood Chamber of Commerce administers the Walk of Fame, which is maintained by the self-financing Hollywood Historic Trust. The Chamber collects fees ($85,000 as of 2025) from each new honoree's sponsor, half of which is used for the creation and installation of the new honoree's star, while the other half is used for maintenance of the entire Walk. The Chamber also hosts induction ceremonies and owns the Walk's licensing rights, the latter of which they've upheld through cease and desist orders and lawsuits.


=== Nominations ===
In 1962, the City of Los Angeles specified the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce as the organization to advise the City regarding new entries to the Walk, and the Chamber has overseen the nomination and selection process ever since. They do so through the self-created Walk of Fame Selection Committee, which as of 2025 receives between 200 and 300 nominations per year. Anyone, including fans, can nominate anyone in the field of entertainment as long as the nominee or their management approve and an application fee ($275 as of 2025) is paid. Nominees must have a history of "charitable contributions" and a minimum of five years' experience in the category for which they are nominated. Posthumous nominees must have been deceased for at least two years.

Each June, approximately thirty nominations are selected for the following year. Nominations not selected are rolled over to the following year; those not selected for two years are dropped and must be renominated to receive further consideration. Once selected, honorees must agree in writing to attend a presentation ceremony within two years, otherwise their nomination is rejected. For deceased honorees, a relative must attend. This rule, known as the "Springsteen policy", was named after Bruce Springsteen, who failed to attend his unveiling in 1989; his star was thus rejected and he is not part of the Walk. 
Traditionally, members of the Selection Committee other than chairman are not made public. However, in 1999, in response to intensifying charges of secrecy in the selection process, the Chamber disclosed its committee members. They were: Johnny Grant, committee chair; Earl Lestz, president of Paramount Studio Group; Stan Spero, retired manager at KMPC and KABC; Kate Nelson, owner of Palace Theatre; and Mary Lou Dudas, vice president of A&M Records. Since 1999, the Chamber has only announced that Lestz became chairman after Grant's death, and the Chamber's current position is that "each of the six categories is represented by someone with expertise in that field."
In 2010, former Director of Communications for the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences John Pavlik replaced Lestz as chairman. While no announcement was made, Pavlik was identified as chairman in the press release announcing 2011's new honorees. By 2016, Maureen Schultz had become chair and in 2023, Ellen K was chair.


=== Rule adjustments ===

Rules prohibit nominees whose contributions lie outside the categories the Walk of Fame honors, but the Selection Committee has adjusted interpretations of its rules to justify selections. For example, the Apollo 11 monuments officially recognize the astronauts for "contributions to the television industry", something that committee chairman Johnny Grant acknowledged was "a bit of a stretch". Another example is Muhammad Ali, whose star was granted after the committee decided boxing was a form of live performance; Ali's star was also placed vertically in a wall instead of horizontally in the sidewalk because Ali shares his name with the prophet Muhammad and therefore requested it not be walked upon.
Only one honoree has had their star unveiled after failing to attend the required unveiling: Barbra Streisand. Streisand did attend when her husband James Brolin was honored two decades later.


=== Star removal ===
Once unveiled, a star cannot be removed. In answer to various requests, the Chamber announced in 2017 that because the Walk is a historical landmark, "once a star has been added ... it is considered a part of the historic fabric" and cannot be removed. The Chamber further clarified this position in 2024, stating that it does not have the authority to remove stars.


== History ==


=== Origin ===
The Hollywood Chamber of Commerce credits E. M. Stuart, its volunteer president in 1953, with the idea for the Walk of Fame. Another account gives fellow Chamber member Harry Sugarman credit. Either way, once the idea was presented, the Chamber fleshed it out and retained an architectural firm to develop proposals. By 1955, after the basic concept and design had been agreed upon, plans were submitted to City Council.
Multiple accounts exist for the origin of the star concept. According to one, it may have come from the Hollywood Hotel, which displayed stars on its dining room ceiling above tables favored by its most famous patrons. Another account credits Sugarman's Tropics Restaurant, whose drink menu featured celebrity photos framed in gold stars.
In February 1956, a prototype was unveiled featuring a caricature inside a blue star on a brown background. Caricatures, however, proved too expensive and difficult to execute, and the brown and blue motif was vetoed by Charles E. Toberman. The final design, including the coral-and-charcoal color scheme, was approved the following month, and over the next year, 1,558 honorees were selected by committees representing four branches of the entertainment industry: motion pictures, television, audio recording, and radio. Members of these committees included Cecil B. DeMille, Samuel Goldwyn, Jesse L. Lasky, Walt Disney, Hal Roach, Mack Sennett, and Walter Lantz. The audio recording committee originally required minimum sales of one million records or 250,000 albums, but they soon realized many important artists would be excluded by this requirement. As a result, the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences was formed to create a separate award for the music industry, leading to the first Grammy Awards in 1959.

Construction of the Walk began in 1958, but two lawsuits delayed completion. The first was filed by local property owners challenging the $1.25 million ($13.6 million in 2024) tax assessment levied upon them. In October 1959, the assessment was ruled legal. The second was filed by Charles Chaplin Jr., who sought damages for the exclusion of his father, whose nomination had been withdrawn due to pressure from multiple quarters. Chaplin's suit was dismissed in 1960, allowing for completion of the project.
While Joanne Woodward is often singled out as the first person to receive a star—possibly because she was the first to be photographed with one—the original stars were installed as a continuous project, with no individual ceremonies. Woodward's name, however, was one of eight drawn at random and inscribed on prototype stars that were built while litigation was delaying permanent construction. The other seven were Olive Borden, Ronald Colman, Louise Fazenda, Preston Foster, Burt Lancaster, Edward Sedgwick, and Ernest Torrence. The eight prototypes were installed temporarily on the northwest corner of Hollywood and Highland in August 1958 to generate publicity and demonstrate how the Walk would look.
The Walk's official groundbreaking took place on February 8, 1960. On March 28, 1960, the first permanent star, Stanley Kramer's, was set near Hollywood and Gower.


=== Stagnation and revitalization ===
Although the Walk was originally conceived in part to encourage redevelopment of Hollywood Boulevard, the 1960s and 1970s saw protracted urban decay in the area. After the initial installation of 1,558 stars in 1960 and 1961, eight years passed without a new star. In 1962, the Los Angeles City Council passed an ordinance naming the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce the agent to advise the City regarding new honorees. The Chamber then devised rules, procedures, and financing methods to do so. In December 1968, Richard D. Zanuck was awarded the Walk's first new star and by May 1975, 99 stars had been added.

Chamber member Johnny Grant is generally credited with resuscitating the Walk and establishing it as a significant tourist attraction. Beginning in 1968, Grant stimulated publicity by requiring each recipient personally attend their star unveiling. Grant later recalled that "it was tough to get people to come accept a star" until the neighborhood finally began its recovery in the 1980s. In 1980, Grant instituted a $2,500 ($9,541 in 2024) fee for all new stars, payable by the entity nominating the recipient, to fund the Walk's upkeep. The fee has increased over time and was $85,000 as of 2025.
Grant was awarded a star for his television work in 1980. In 2002, he received a second special-category star to acknowledge his role in improving and popularizing the Walk. He was also named chairman of the Selection Committee and Honorary Mayor of Hollywood, a ceremonial position previously held by Art Linkletter and Monty Hall, amongst others. Grant remained in both offices until his death in 2008. He also hosted the majority of the Walk's star unveilings during this time.


=== Preservation and expansion ===
In 1978, the city of Los Angeles designated the Hollywood Walk of Fame as Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monument #194. In 1985, the Hollywood Boulevard Commercial and Entertainment District was added to the National Register of Historic Places, and while the Walk was not included in the listing, it was mentioned as an element of "fine urban design". In 2010, the U.S. House of Representatives officially commended and congratulated the Walk on its 50th anniversary.

In 1984, a fifth category, Live Theatre, was added to acknowledge contributions from the live performance branch of the entertainment industry. Additionally, a second row of stars was created to alternate with stars from the first row. In 1994, the Walk was extended one block west, where it now ends at the Hollywood and La Brea Gateway gazebo. A special star for the Walk is located nearby.
In 1996, during construction of the B Line, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) removed and stored more than 300 stars. Controversy arose when the MTA proposed destroying each star's terrazzo pad while preserving only the brass lettering, surrounds, and medallions, then pouring new terrazzo after construction was complete, but the Cultural Heritage Commission ruled that the star pads needed to be removed intact.
In 2023, a sixth category, Sports Entertainment, was added to acknowledge contributions of athletes to the entertainment industry. In 2025, the Chamber reported that they add an average of thirty new stars every year.


=== Restoration ===
In 2008, a long-term restoration project began with an evaluation of all 2,365 stars, each of which received an A, B, C, D, or F. Ten stars received Fs and fifty received Ds, the damage ranging from minor cosmetic flaws to holes and fissures severe enough to be a tripping hazard. After the evaluation, the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce together with the city and county of Los Angeles made plans to repair or replace at least 778 stars at an estimated cost of more than $4 million ($5.84 million in 2024).

To encourage funding for the project by corporate sponsors, the Chamber inaugurated the "Friends of Walk of Fame" program, which recognizes donors with honorary plaques adjacent to the Walk in front of Dolby Theatre. The program received criticism, being described by a Los Angeles Times reporter as "the latest corporate attempt to buy some good buzz." Another critic stated "I think Johnny Grant would roll over in his grave."
In 2015, the city introduced the "Heart of Hollywood Master Plan", which promotes creating a pedestrian zone on Hollywood between La Brea and Highland, and in 2019, they commissioned Gensler to plan a $4 million ($4.92 million in 2024) renovation for the entire Walk. In 2020, draft plans were released, proposing new landscaping and bike lanes, sidewalk dining and widening, and the removal of street lanes and parking between Gower Street and La Brea Avenue. Phase one of this proposal, which includes widening sidewalks; consolidating bus stops; adding benches, tables, and chairs; and removing parking lanes between Orange Drive and Gower Street, was approved in 2021.


=== Theft ===

Four stars and one statue have been stolen from the Walk. In 2000, James Stewart's and Kirk Douglas's stars disappeared after they had been temporarily removed for a construction project. Police recovered the stars in the home of a construction worker employed on the project, however, the stars were badly damaged and had to be remade. One of Gene Autry's five stars was also stolen from a construction area.
In 2005, thieves used a concrete saw to remove Gregory Peck's star from its site at Hollywood and North El Centro Avenue. The star was replaced almost immediately, but the original was not recovered and the perpetrators not caught. Another theft occurred in 2019, when Austin Clay, the same individual who previously vandalized Donald Trump's star, stole the Marilyn Monroe statue atop Hollywood and La Brea Gateway.
Thieves have also attempted to chisel out individual stars' category emblems.


== Honorees ==

While more than 2,800 stars have been awarded, because some individuals have been awarded multiple times, the number of individuals honored is less than the total star count. In the early 2010s, the Los Angeles Times estimated that approximately 2,200 individuals were honored by the 2,400+ stars issued at that time.


=== Diversity ===
An analysis in 2011 found that minority representation, while rising, was underrepresented on the Walk. Of all stars, 5.1% honored African-Americans, 3.4% honored Hispanics, and 0.4% honored Asians, all of which were significantly less than those minorities' percentage of the overall population. Analysts and commentators weren't surprised by this, as the same lack of representation was present in Hollywood as a whole. The Hollywood Chamber of Commerce responded by stating that it has been working hard to improve diversity. They also noted that several of the Walk's original honorees were minorities, including Anna May Wong, Dolores Del Rio, Cantinflas, Hattie McDaniel, and others.


=== Multiple honors ===


==== Categories ====
No one has been honored in all six categories, while one person, Gene Autry, has been honored in five. Bob Hope and Roy Rogers have been honored in four, while Tony Martin and Mickey Rooney have been honored individually in three and in a shared star for a fourth, Tony Martin as part of Sons of the Pioneers and Mickey Rooney with his wife Jan Chamberlin.

More than thirty individuals have been honored in three categories, including Jack Benny, Perry Como, Bing Crosby, Douglas Fairbanks Jr., Danny Kaye, Dean Martin, Frank Sinatra, Dinah Shore, Jo Stafford, and Gale Storm, and even more have been honored in two, including Walt Disney, Alfred Hitchcock, Michael Jackson, Dolly Parton,  and each member of The Beatles.
Cher was selected twice, once individually and once as part of Sonny & Cher; however she was only honored once as she declined to schedule the mandatory personal appearance for her individual selection.


==== Dynasties ====
The family with the most individuals recognized is the Barrymores, with five. Other families with more than two individuals recognized include the Bridges, Carradines, Curtises, Dern-Ladds, Garland-Minnellis, Hustons, Lockharts, Nelsons, Reynolds-Fishers and more.


=== Unique and unusual ===


==== Names ====
More than a dozen stars are identified with a one-word stage name rather than the honoree's full name, for example: Liberace, Pink, Roseanne, and Slash. Additionally, some stars include the honoree's name and stage name, such as Kurt Alexander "Big Boy", Kenny "Babyface" Edmonds, "Mama" Cass Elliot, Curtis "50 Cent" Jackson, "Shotgun Tom" Kelly, and "Weird Al" Yankovic.

 
Two pairs of stars share identical names representing different people. There are two Harrison Ford stars, one for the silent film actor and the other for present-day actor, and two Michael Jackson stars, one for the pop singer and the other for the radio personality. After Michael Jackson's death in 2009, many fans mistook the radio personality's star for the singer's, the latter of which was inaccessible due to the premiere of Brüno.


==== Professions ====
Several below-the-line filmmakers have been included in the Walk, such as: Conrad Hall and Haskell Wexler (cinematographers); Edith Head and Ruth E. Carter (costume designers); Max Factor  and The Westmores (makeup artists); John Chambers, Stan Winston, and Rick Baker (special effect make-up artists); and Ray Harryhausen and Dennis Muren (visual and special effects artists). Max Factor was a makeup manufacturer as well.
Two novelists have stars on the Walk: Sidney Sheldon, who wrote screenplays before becoming a novelist, and Ray Bradbury, whose stories have formed the basis for dozens of movies and television programs. One film critic, Roger Ebert, has a star, although it is in the television category as his review shows were televised.  Movie theater proprietors are also included, most notably Sid Grauman, creator of the Grauman's Chinese and Egyptian theaters, and Earvin Magic Johnson, former owner of Magic Johnson Theaters. Amongst other businessmen, at least one has his business listed alongside his name: Guy Laliberte, who co-founded Cirque de Soleil.
Eight inventors have stars on the Walk: George Eastman, inventor of roll film; Thomas Edison, developer of many devices used in the film industry, including the phonograph, motion picture camera, and long-lasting, practical electric light bulb; Lee de Forest, inventor of the triode vacuum tube and Phonofilm; Herbert Kalmus, inventor of Technicolor; Auguste and Louis Lumière, inventors of important motion picture camera components; Ray Dolby, co-developer of the first practical video tape recorder and a pioneer in surround sound and noise reduction; and Mark Serrurier, who re-designed Moviola, which was invented by his father. Hedy Lamarr, co-inventor of a frequency-hopping radio guidance system that was a precursor to Wi-Fi networks and cellular telephone systems, is also honored but for her acting work.
Several honorees have also achieved political notability. Presidents Ronald Reagan and Donald Trump have stars on the Walk, and Reagan is also one of two California governors with a star; the other is Arnold Schwarzenegger. Additionally, one former U.S. senator (George Murphy) and two former U.S. representatives (Helen Gahagan and Sonny Bono) have stars. Ignacy Paderewski, Prime Minister of Poland between World War I and II, is the only foreign head of government represented.
Three judges have been honored, all in the television category as their proceedings were televised: Judge Greg Mathis, Judge Judy Sheindlin, and Judge Joseph Wapner.


==== Animals ====

Three dogs are included in the Walk: the fictional character Lassie and animal actors Rin Tin Tin and Strongheart. An additional animated dog, Snoopy, is also included, as are several other animated animals.


==== Fictional characters ====

In addition to members of the entertainment industry, the Walk also honors fictional characters, with more than twenty honored as of 2025.
The first fictional character added and the only one included in the original 1,558 stars was Lassie. However, despite being played by numerous canine actors, the most notable being Pal, Lassie is often referred to as a canine actor herself. Because of this, the second fictional character honored, Mickey Mouse, is often referred to as the first. Mickey was added in 1978, in honor of his 50th anniversary. Minnie Mouse would not be honored until forty years later, however when she was, her star was located directly outside El Capitan, Disney's flagship theater.
In 2004, Godzilla became the first kaiju honored and in 2024, Batman became the first superhero honored. Jim Henson, one of four puppeteers with star, has three stars dedicated to his fictional creations: one for The Muppets as a whole and the others for Kermit the Frog and Big Bird.
Clayton Moore is so inextricably linked with his Lone Ranger character that his star lists the honoree as playing the character. Tommy Riggs is also listed alongside Betty Lou whom he voiced, although his star does not specify that he played her, rather it implies he acted as himself alongside her, which he also did. A third actor tightly linked to a specific character, Paul Reubens as Pee Wee Herman, is also honored, although in this case the star only lists the character, not the actor.


==== Repeat selections and entries ====
Apollo 11 astronauts Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin, and Michael Collins share four monuments, one on each corner of Hollywood and Vine, all in the television category. Similarly, George Eastman was given two stars in the same category for the same achievement: the invention of roll film.
Charlie Chaplin is the only honoree to be selected twice for the same star. He was unanimously voted into the initial group in 1956, but the Selection Committee ultimately excluded him, reportedly due to questions regarding his morals but more likely due to his left-leaning political views. Chaplin was re-selected and added to the Walk in 1972, the same year he received his Academy Lifetime Achievement Award.
The committee's Chaplin difficulties reportedly contributed to its decision in 1978 against awarding a star to Paul Robeson. The resulting outcry from the entertainment industry, civic circles, local and national politicians, and many other quarters was so intense that the decision was reversed and Robeson was awarded a star in 1979.


==== Groups and pairings ====
Some stars honor groups, not individuals. Most are musically related, but some are not. For example, two sports teams are honored: the Harlem Globetrotters and Los Angeles Dodgers. Additionally, the largest group represented by a single star is in the motion picture category; it is the estimated 122 adults and 12 children collectively known as the Munchkins from The Wizard of Oz.
Other stars honor professional pairings rather than individuals. Examples include radio co-hosts Al Lohman & Roger Barkley, Ken Minyard & Bob Arthur, Mark & Brian, and Mark & Kim; live performers Siegfried & Roy and Jan & Mickey Rooney; television writers and creators Sid and Marty Krofft, actors Mary Kate & Ashley Olsen, and numerous musical pairings.
One star honors both a group and a professional pairing within the group: the star for the band Heart also includes the names of its singing duo Ann & Nancy Wilson.


=== Organizations ===
Commercial organizations are only considered for businesses with an entertainment industry connection of at least fifty years. While not technically part of the Walk, as a city ordinance prohibits placing corporate names on sidewalks, these stars are installed on private property adjacent to it. Stars in this category include Chevy Suburban, Disneyland, Hollywood Reporter, KTLA, Los Angeles Dodgers, Los Angeles Times, Musso & Frank, Variety, and Victoria's Secret Angels.
Other organizations honored with stars in or adjacent to the Walk are the Los Angeles Police Department, Screen Actors Guild, Recording Academy, and the Walk of Fame itself.


=== Errors ===

Three honoree's stars contain an emblem that does not match the category they were honored in. Carmen Miranda was honored in the motion picture category but her star bears the television emblem, Larry King was honored in the television category but his star bears a motion picture emblem, and Monty Woolley was honored in the motion picture category but his star bears a television emblem.
Several stars have been unveiled with the wrong name. Most notably, film and television actor Don Haggerty's star originally displayed the first name "Dan". The mistake was fixed, but years later when the television actor Dan Haggerty (no relation to Don) received a star, confusion due to the former misspelling sprouted an urban legend that Dan Haggerty was the only honoree to have a star removed. Another star bearing the wrong name was Mauritz Stiller, which for 28 years read "Maurice Diller". This mistake was corrected in 1988.
In addition to incorrect names, some honoree's names have been misspelled. In 2010, Julia Louis-Dreyfus's star was constructed reading "Julia Luis Dreyfus". The actress was reportedly amused and the error was corrected. Similarly, Dick Van Dyke's star misspelled his last name as "Vandyke" before it was rectified, and four stars remain misspelled: Lotte Lehmann (misspelled as "Lottie"), Merian C. Cooper ("Meriam"), Auguste Lumière ("August"), and Mary Livingstone ("Livingston").


=== Controversial ===
Several honorees have resulted in controversy, some immediately when honored and others later. Charlie Chaplin's initial selection was so controversial due to his political views that it was revoked, and today his inclusion would be questioned due to his multiple relationships with minors. Gal Gadot's inclusion has also received backlash due to her outspoken support of the Israeli military; her star unveiling was met with protests and her star was vandalized soon after.
Numerous individuals and organizations have called or petitioned for the removal of Donald Trump's star, including local residents, Latino advocacy groups, and West Hollywood City Council, the latter of whom stated that "the Hollywood Walk of Fame is an honor. When one belittles and attacks minorities, immigrants, Muslims, people with disabilities or women – the honor no longer exists." Others have also come to the star's defense.
Spade Cooley is believed to be the only convicted murderer honored by the Walk. He is not the only murderer though, as Gig Young is known to have murdered his wife. Young was never convicted, however, as he committed suicide shortly after. Other controversial criminal-related stars include those of accused rapists and domestic abusers, some of whom were convicted while others were not. The MeToo movement saw concerted efforts to have several of these honorees removed, most notably Bill Cosby after his sexual assault conviction that was later overturned.  Similar removal campaigns were held against Sean Combs.


=== Rejected ===
Numerous individuals have been selected for the Walk but rejected the honor. Prince rejected his inclusion twice, as he believed he wasn't ready. Madonna rejected her inclusion as she finds the Walk "cheesy". Clint Eastwood has rejected the Walk several times, this despite the Chamber reserving a spot for him outside Grauman's Chinese, as he is reportedly not interested. Numerous individuals have also de facto rejected their inclusion by refusing to schedule or show up for their star unveiling, including Leonardo DiCaprio, Julia Roberts, Bruce Springsteen, and Denzel Washington.
The Chamber also rejects numerous nominations every year. These are typically not made public; however, after Kim Kardashian publicly stated her desire for a star, the Chamber clarified that her nomination would be rejected as the Walk does not honor reality stars unless they have been nominated for or win an Oscar, Emmy, Grammy, or other major award given for a performance.


== Visitors ==
The Walk has played an important role in making tourism the largest industry in Los Angeles County. According to a 2003 report by market research firm NPO Plog Research, the Walk attracts about ten million visitors annually, which is more than the Sunset Strip, Grauman's Chinese Theatre, the Queen Mary, and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art combined. U.S. News ranks the Walk as the third best attraction in Los Angeles, after Griffith Observatory and the Getty Center.
Despite the Walk's popularity and prestige, visitors are often underwhelmed due to its perceived dirtiness, grittiness, and problems with homelessness and crime. The Walk has repeatedly been called the "Walk of Shame" and designated as "the world's worst tourist attraction", and while City Council members have created beautification plans, as of 2024 they have not been put into action.


=== Street vendors and performers ===

The Walk of Fame is one of Los Angeles's most popular locations for street vendors. In 2018, street vending was banned, but the ban was rescinded in 2024. Vendors commonly sell merchandise or bacon-wrapped hot dogs.
Buskers, musicians distributing albums, and other street and costumed performers  also frequent the Walk, particularly outside Grauman's Chinese Theater and Madame Tussauds Hollywood. In 2016, City Council considered limiting the amount permitted in the area, as many visitors report negative experiences due to the performers' rude and aggressive behavior. The performers have also been known to get into altercations with each other.


=== Unveilings ===

Star unveilings are free to attend and typically attract crowds in the dozens, hundreds, or thousands. Michael Jackson's unveiling in 1984 set a record for the highest number of attendees, with 5,000, while Selena Quintanilla’s 2017 unveiling attracted 4,500 attendees, an amount the Chamber claimed was a record despite it being less than Jackson's. Vicente Fernandez's unveiling also attracted a similarly high 4,000 attendees.


=== Tributes ===

The Hollywood Chamber of Commerce has adopted the tradition of placing flower wreaths at the stars of newly deceased honorees; as a result, these stars have become impromptu memorial and vigil sites. Fans often show respect  by laying flowers or other symbolic tributes, and some continue to do so on anniversary remembrances. Others show support in other ways; for example, Julio Iglesias's star is cleaned and polished once a month by a group of elderly women.


=== Rallies, protests, and vandalism ===
Walk of Fame stars are sometimes used as sites for rallies or protests. Often, the protests occur as vandalism, which has ranged from profanity and political statements to damage with heavy tools. In 2005, closed circuit surveillance cameras were installed on Hollywood between La Brea and Vine to discourage these activities. Additionally, if an honoree has a large enough scandal, police will increase their presence around that person's star to deter vandalism.

Donald Trump's star, obtained for his work on the Miss Universe pageant and The Apprentice, has been the site of numerous protests and rallies; it has also been vandalized multiple times. During the 2016 presidential election, a service dog's owner had the dog defecate on Trump's star, which was then posted on Twitter. Shortly after, James Otis, a claimed heir to the Otis Elevator Company fortune, used a pickaxe and sledgehammer to destroy the star's brass inlays. He readily admitted to the vandalism and was sentenced to three years' probation. The star was repaired and then served as the site of rallies and protests throughout the election.
Further vandalism of Donald Trump's star occurred in 2018 when it was destroyed a second time, this time by Austin Clay. Clay later surrendered to police, after which he was sentenced to one day in jail, three years of probation, and twenty days of community service. He was also ordered to attend psychological counseling and pay $9,404.46 in restitution.  Later in 2018, after Trump's star was repaired, it was placed behind bars and defaced with swastikas and other graffiti. Conversely, dozens of blank stars were vandalized in support of Trump's star that same year. Trump's star was vandalized multiple times again in 2020, including with a pickaxe and with dog feces and spray-paint. 
Other politicians' stars have not seen the same level of protests or vandalism, however Ronald Reagan's star was the site of a 1981 gathering to request signatures petitioning him to keep leopards on the endangered species list. The star was also peed on for David Bowie's Day-In Day-Out music video, however, the moment was removed so that MTV would accept the video into their rotation.
Protests and vandalism of non-politician's stars also occurs. In 2009, Sharon Stone, Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen, and Aretha Franklin's stars had the words "Old Fur Hag", "Fur Hags", and "Fur Hag" written on them, presumably in protest of them wearing fur clothing. In 2015, Sofia Vergara's star was graffitied in reference to her use of frozen embryos. In 2017, Bob Marley's star was damaged by a heavy object and protestors also gathered around Kevin Spacey's star to protest predatory culture in Hollywood. In 2024, Selena Quintanilla and Jenni Rivera's stars were covered in black paint twice within 24 hours and in 2025, Gal Gadot's star was vandalized in reference to the Israeli military. Bill Cosby's star has been vandalized multiple times, including in 2014 and 2018, and radio commentator Michael Jackson's star has also been defaced (presumably, it was mistaken for the singer's with the same name), after which Paris Jackson cleaned it up. 
Not all vandalism on the Walk is a form of protest. Shortly after Hugh Hefner's death, his star was defaced with a blue crown and the letters "RIP", and John Lennon's star was defaced with several non-negative messages in 2013.


== Influence ==

The success of the Hollywood Walk of Fame has inspired walks throughout the world. Other walks that either cite Hollywood's as their inspiration or claim to be their country's equivalent to Hollywood's include those in Almeria; Berlin; Cambridge, MA; Hong Kong; Las Vegas, NV; Łódź; London; Mexico City; Mumbai; Sydney; Tampere; Wembley; and many more. Los Angeles also has several other walks inspired by Hollywood's, and elsewhere in California, the creators of San Francisco's Rainbow Honor Walk and Walk of Game have both cited the Hollywood Walk of Fame as their inspiration.


== See also ==
History of Hollywood
Hollywood Boulevard Commercial and Entertainment District


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Hollywood Chamber of Commerce Walk of Fame videos – YouTube
Hollywood Chamber of Commerce
Hollywood Star Walk map: Los Angeles Times
Hollywood Star Walk list: Los Angeles Times
Hollywood Star Template
Hollywood Star Map Locator