Interspecies Reviewers (Japanese: 異種族レビュアーズ, Hepburn: Ishuzoku Rebyuāzu) is a Japanese fantasy sex comedy manga series written by Amahara and illustrated by masha. It has been serialized through Nico Nico Seiga's manga website Dragon Dragon Age since August 2016 and has been collected in eleven tankōbon volumes by Fujimi Shobo. The series is licensed in English by Yen Press. A 12-episode television anime adaptation produced by Passione aired from January to March 2020.


== Synopsis ==
In a world where many different humanoid species exist and prostitution is legal, there exist various brothels for each kind of species with "succu-girls" (サキュ嬢, Sakyu-jō), who have succubus blood running through them. As each species has different opinions on how each succu-girl works for them, various brothel visitors have become reviewers, rating their experiences with various succu-girls and posting them in the local tavern. The series largely centers on a human named Stunk, an elf named Zel, and an angel named Crimvael; Stunk and Zel's goal is to have experiences with every kind of succu-girl there is, to the point where they even wish to take their quest all the way to Heaven, while Crimvael (nicknamed "Crim") is searching for the missing piece of their halo, for they are unable to return to Heaven without it.


== Characters ==
Stunk (スタンク, Sutanku)
Voiced by: Junji Majima
A male human adventurer and one of the reviewers. He values appearance when it comes to succu-girls, though it is hinted he might harbor feelings for Meidri.
Zel (ゼル, Zeru)
Voiced by: Yūsuke Kobayashi
A male elf adventurer and one of the reviewers. He values succu-girls who have a high mana level.
Crimvael (クリムヴェール, Kurimuvēru)
Voiced by: Miyu Tomita
An angel with a broken halo who is rescued by Stunk and Zel and begins working at the Ale & Eats until they can repair their halo and return to Heaven. Although Crimvael possesses both male and female genitalia, they hide this fact from most others, allowing most people to believe they are male in order to avoid unwanted attention from Stunk and Zel. Crimvael is not very assertive and is somewhat embarrassed by the fact that they are by far the "largest" among the Reviewers.
Meidri (メイドリー, Meidorī)
Voiced by: M.A.O (Japanese); Brittany Lauda (English)
A young birdmaid waitress at the Ale & Eats, who is often dismayed at the antics of the reviewers and will get into a violent rage if they get her involved with their perverted behavior. She is the target of most of Stunk's sexual advances, which she always avoids by beating him up.
Mitsue (ミツエ)
Voiced by: Kyō Yaoya
An elderly human female prostitute. Despite her physical appearance, she is a favorite of Zel due to her high quality of mana.
Kanchal (カンチャル, Kancharu)
Voiced by: Kaede Yuasa
A male halfling reviewer. He has a fetish for BDSM in playing the role of the master.
Bruise (ブルーズ, Burūzu)
Voiced by: Kenji Hamada
A dogman reviewer with a preference for plump succu-girls. He grades the quality of succu-girls based on his sensitive senses.
Narugami (ナルガミ, Narugami)
Voiced by: Kengo Kawanishi
A lamia reviewer.
Samturn (サムターン, Samutān)
Voiced by: Yuuki Inoue
A demon reviewer.
Lulu (ルルゥ, Rurū)
Voiced by: Ayaka Nanase
An honorary fairy reviewer.
Count Delivel (デリベル, Deriberu)
Voiced by: Yōji Ueda
An honorary vampire reviewer. His name is translated as Count Call Girlula in Yen Press releases.
Demia Duodectet (デミア・デュオデクテット, Demia Duodekutetto)
Voiced by: Hibiku Yamamura
An archmage who runs a Magical Metropolis brothel offering copies of herself. She also endorses several establishments, including a gender-swap inn. She has a particular interest in Crimvael's unique properties. It is eventually revealed that she has the missing piece of Crim's halo, but what she plans to do with it is unknown.
Elma (エルマ, Eruma)
Voiced by: Momoyo Koyama
A female elf prostitute. She is often looked down upon by non-human species for being over 500 years old.
Mii (みー, Mī)
Voiced by: Karin Isobe
A catgirl prostitute who essentially starts Crimvael on their "journey" by being the first succu-girl they ever lay with.
Okpa (オクパ, Okupa)
Voiced by: Mari Hino
A prostitute with tentacles (a Cecaelia; though the series refers to her as a Dagon).
Eldry (エルドリー, Erudorī)
Voiced by: Rei Matsuzaki
A birdmaid prostitute.
Aloe (アロエ, Aroe)
Voiced by: Yōko Hikasa
A fairy madam and the proprietor of the Fairy Nectar brothel. She fornicates with clients as a hobby.
Milky (ミルキー, Mirukī)
Voiced by: Yuri Katō
A female minotaur prostitute with blue eyes and tan skin.
Ginny (ギニー, Ginī)
Voiced by: Yuka Nukui
A female minotaur prostitute with green eyes and fair skin.
Elza (エルザ, Eruza)
Voiced by: Makoto Koichi
A spotted hyena girl prostitute who seems to be one of Crimvael's favorites.
Piltia (ピルティア, Pirutia)
Voiced by: Shiori Izawa
A female halfling prostitute.
Roana (ローナ, Rōna)
Voiced by: Takako Tanaka
A female elf prostitute.
Tiaplate (ティアプレート, Tiapurēto)
Voiced by: Natsumi Takamori
A female fire spirit (salamander) prostitute.
Incubus (インキュバス, Inkyubasu)
Voiced by: Ryōta Ōsaka
An incubus reviewer who likes every type of woman to the point where he gives them all perfect tens, which inadvertently makes his reviews useless. He seems to take a liking to Meidri, much to her disgust.
Spirette (スピレット, Supiretto)
Voiced by: Juri Nagatsuma
A female spirit (ghost) prostitute.


== Media ==


=== Manga ===
Interspecies Reviewers is a manga series written by Amahara and illustrated by masha. The first chapter was launched on July 7, 2016, as a special one-shot in Fujimi Shobo's shōnen magazine Monthly Dragon Age; the manga began monthly serialization through Nico Nico Seiga's affiliated comic website Dragon Dragon Age on August 19. Amahara had previously drawn a similar 18+ comic series entitled Ishufūzoku Kurosu Rebyū (異種風俗クロスレビュー; lit. "Interspecies Sex Service Cross-Review") on Pixiv beginning in September 2014. As of March 2025, the manga has been collected in eleven tankōbon volumes published by Kadokawa. A manga anthology, illustrated by various artists, titled Interspecies Reviewers Comic Anthology: Darkness (異種族レビュアーズコミックアンソロジー 〜ダークネス〜) was released on January 9, 2020, with the second volume released on February 9, 2021. The main manga and the anthology are licensed in North America by Yen Press, which announced an English paperback release at Sakura-Con on March 31, 2018.


==== Volumes ====


===== Interspecies Reviewers =====


===== Interspecies Reviewers Comic Anthology: Darkness =====


=== Light novel ===
A light novel adaptation entitled Interspecies Reviewers: Ecstacy Days was published by Kadokawa on December 7, 2018. It was written by Tetsu Habara (葉原鉄) and illustrated by W18. A sequel, Interspecies Reviewers: Marionette Crisis, was published on January 9, 2020. The novels are licensed in North America by Yen Press; the first was released on August 18, 2020.


==== Volumes ====


=== Anime ===
On June 28, 2019, Kadokawa announced that the manga would receive a television anime adaptation produced by Passione. The 12-episode series was directed by Yuki Ogawa and written by Kazuyuki Fudeyasu, with character designs by Makoto Uno and music composed by Kotone Uchihigashi. Junji Majima, Yūsuke Kobayashi, and Miyu Tomita (the voice actors of Stunk, Zel, and Crimvael, respectively) performed the opening theme song "Ikōze Paradise" (イこうぜ☆パラダイス; lit. "Let's Go Paradise") and the ending theme "Hanabira Ondo" (ハナビラ音頭; lit. "Flower Petal Ondō").
The series premiered on AT-X on January 11, 2020, with a censored version later airing on Tokyo MX, BS11, KBS, and SUN. In February 2020, Tokyo MX cancelled its broadcast due to "changes in circumstances within [the station]", while SUN cancelled future airings of the series at the behest of channel company's management. It began airing on GBS on February 28 and on BBC on March 7, 2020.
The anime was licensed in North America by Funimation, which simulcasted the first three censored episodes with English subtitles and later released a dubbed version of the first episode. However, the company removed the series from its online streaming platform on January 31, stating that it "fell outside of [Funimation's] standards". On February 1, the company's French subsidiary Wakanim announced that it would discontinue the English release, but continued offering the anime with French, German, and Russian subtitles. On February 2, Australian subsidiary AnimeLab announced that it would continue simulcasting the series in Australia and New Zealand after "adjusting [its] sourcing of materials". On February 6, Amazon Prime Video removed the anime from its service.
Critical Mass Video planned to release the series with English subtitles completely uncensored on Blu-ray on December 7, 2021, but it was delayed until January 18, 2022.


==== Episodes ====


== Reception ==
In August 2017, the manga was ranked 16th in the web category and was awarded the "DLsite Award" by Media Factory's manga news magazine Da Vinci and the streaming service Niconico.
The anime adaptation was controversial because it walked "the thin line of how explicit anime can be" as Isiah Jones of CBR noted. Stig Høgset of THEM Anime Reviews called the series "surprisingly entertaining" and sex positive while saying that it is "well thought out" with many of the sex workers having "distinct personalities" and said the show got away with a lot when it came to imagery. added that the series bends the viewer's "expectations out of shape", felt uncomfortable with some parts of it, noted that the language used is direct, and praised it for being "animated pretty well". He concluded the review by saying that the series is one of the better "sex positive shows out there" and called it a "new record in openly sexual fun" but cannot be considered hentai, giving it a rating of 4 out of 5 stars.


=== Anime adaptation censorship in Australia ===
On March 9, 2020, the Australian Classification Board passed censored prints of the first four episodes series with an MA15+ rating; the censored version had censorship icons pasted over scenes of nudity and sexual activity. By that time, AnimeLab had eight episodes of the series available for streaming; all twelve were available by May.

In June 2021, AnimeLab's subscribers were relocated to Funimation, resulting in the immediate dropping of the series. A statement issued to subscribers of both platforms read: We have determined that this series falls outside of our standards. We have the utmost respect for our creators so rather than substantially alter the content, we felt taking it down was the most respectful choice. As Australian and New Zealand users are now using the global Funimation platform, this applies to the AU/NZ region and this show will no longer be available to viewers in Australia and New Zealand.
In August 2021, Madman Entertainment submitted uncensored prints of all episodes of the series to the ACB; they were refused classification after the ACB found sex scenes involving halflings Kanchal and Piltia in the third and ninth episodes, and concluded that they "depict a person who appears to be under the age of 18 years in a manner likely to cause offence to a reasonable adult."


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (in Japanese)
Anime official website (in Japanese)
Interspecies Reviewers (manga) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia