Jamuna Television (Bengali: যমুনা টেলিভিশন; in reference to the Jamuna river), commonly known as Jamuna TV, stylized as ᴊamuna|tv, is a privately owned Bangladeshi satellite and cable news and current affairs television channel. It is owned by the Jamuna Group, and was founded by the company's founder and former chairman Nurul Islam Babul in 2014. The channel's headquarters are located in the Jamuna Future Park Complex at Progoti Shoroni in Baridhara. On YouTube, Jamuna Television is the  most subscribed Bangladeshi YouTube channel.


== History ==
In 2002, Jamuna Television received a no-objection certificate (NOC) permitting it to broadcast for five years on both terrestrial and satellite platforms. However, in 2005, the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP)-led government revoked its broadcasting rights without explanation. Although the High Court later allowed the channel to resume operations, the government appealed the decision.  
Despite the expiration of its initial certificate, Jamuna Television began test transmissions on 15 October 2009. The Bangladesh Telecommunication Regulatory Commission (BTRC) shut down the channel on 19 November 2009, citing allegations of unauthorized broadcasting. In 2010, the High Court upheld the government’s order to suspend the channel’s operations. On 29 July 2013, Jamuna Television was granted a new license to relaunch, and the channel was officially inaugurated on 5 April 2014. Among its early staff members was British journalist Simon Dring, former managing director of Ekushey Television.  
In May 2016, Jamuna Television was among nine Bangladeshi television channels that signed an agreement with Bdnews24.com to subscribe to *Prism*, a video-based news service run by children. In December 2018, journalists from Jamuna Television and its sister publication *Jugantor* were attacked in Nawabganj Upazila, Dhaka, leaving ten injured. The channel was also temporarily taken off-air during the 2018 Bangladeshi general election.  
In January 2019, three Jamuna Television journalists were assaulted by a group of eight to ten individuals at a rehabilitation center in Bogra; police later arrested three suspects in connection with the incident. On 19 May 2019, Jamuna Television, along with five other broadcasters, began transmitting via the Bangladesh-1 satellite after signing an agreement with Bangladesh Satellite Company Limited (BSCL).  
On 5 March 2022, Fahim Ahmed was appointed chief executive officer of Jamuna Television.


== Controversies ==
In 2015, a program called Investigation 360 was accused of defaming the then environment minister, Hasan Mahmud, for airing a report related to Climate Fund. A defamation case was filed against the mass media under sections 501 and 502 for the investigative report that 35 crore taka was spent on the construction of the Sheikh Russell Aviary Park in Rangunia from the Climate Fund.
On 6 November 2016, Jamuna TV's senior reporter Shakil Hasan and video journalist Shaheen Alam were attacked while reporting on an illegal polythene bag manufacturing factory at Devidas Lane in Chawkbazar, Dhaka. An attempt was made to set the journalist on fire by pouring kerosene on him. In 2018, the PRAN-RFL group filed a lawsuit. Ravi and the National Board of Revenue filed a case. Jamuna Television's cable broadcast was stopped in the wake of the 11th National Assembly elections held on 30 December 2018.
Jamuna Television was one of the Bangladeshi channels whose YouTube channels were geo-blocked in India on 9 May 2025, citing threat to national security concerns during the 2025 India–Pakistan conflict.


== See also ==
List of television stations in Bangladesh
Telecommunications in Bangladesh
Media of Bangladesh
List of newspapers in Bangladesh
ЧЖоу


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Jamuna Television at Wikimedia Commons
Official website