The Lanyue (Chinese: 揽月; pinyin: lǎn yuè; lit. 'embracing the moon') lander, formerly known as the China crewed lunar surface lander (中国载人月面着陆器) or simply as the lunar surface lander (月面着陆器), is a spacecraft under development by the China Academy of Space Technology. The purpose of the lander is to carry two astronauts to the lunar surface and to return them to lunar orbit after a set period of time. The lander's initial lunar-landing attempt is envisioned to occur by 2030.


== Nomenclature ==
The official names for both the crewed lunar lander and the next-generation crewed spacecraft, the Mengzhou (梦舟), were revealed by the China Manned Space Agency (CMSA) on 24 February 2024. One possible English translation for Lanyue is Embracing the Moon while the English translation for Mengzhou can be Vessel of Dreams or Dream Vessel.


== Overview ==
Since at least August 2021, Western news media has reported that China's main spacecraft contractor was working on a human-rated landing system for lunar missions. On 12 July 2023, at the 9th China (International) Commercial Aerospace Forum in Wuhan, Hubei province, Zhang Hailian, a deputy chief designer with the CMSA, publicly introduced a preliminary plan to land two astronauts on the Moon by the year 2030. Under this plan, the astronauts will conduct scientific work upon landing on the Moon, including the collection of lunar rock and regolith samples. After a short stay on the lunar surface, they will carry the collected samples back into lunar orbit in their spacecraft and subsequently, to Earth.
The preliminary plan describes a 'landing segment' that consists of a new lunar-lander attached to a propulsion stage which together are to be launched autonomously into a trans-lunar injection (TLI) orbit by the under-development Long March 10 rocket. The lander-propulsion stage arrangement is somewhat analogous to the lander-orbiter architecture of the 2020 Chang'e 5 and the 2024 Chang'e 6 robotic lunar sample-return missions; however, unlike the orbiters for the robotic missions, the propulsion stage for the crewed lander will descend from lunar orbit together with the lander rather than remaining in lunar orbit. (The propulsion stage will undergo a controlled impact landing on the Moon after it separates from the crewed lander during the final stages of the descent, while the lander itself will attempt a powered soft landing).


== Development history ==
On 24 April 2024, Lin Xiqiang, deputy director of China Manned Space Agency (CMSA), stated that the initial development of various products for China's lunar missions, including the Lanyue lander, is complete; according to Lin, mechanical and thermal articles for the lander and other mission segments have been constructed and the requisite rocket engines are undergoing hot fire tests. Lin further elaborated that prototype production and tests are in full swing and that the crewed lunar exploration launch site is currently under construction near the existing coastal Wenchang spaceport in Hainan province.
On 29 October 2024, CMSA announced that a separation test for the two modules of the landing system (presumably the lander and its propulsion stage) had been carried out.
On 7 August 2025, CMSA announced that integrated landing and ascent tests have been successfully carried out using a lander test article at a facility located in Huailai County in Hebei Province. These tests verified the craft's landing and takeoff systems, control systems, lunar contact shutdown procedures, and the compatibility of interfaces between subsystems, including guidance, navigation and control as well as the propulsion system. CMSA also indicated that mechanical tests simulating the impact of launch on the landing stack have been carried out. Tests to verify the craft's response to the thermal environment of cislunar space have also been carried out.


== Lander attributes ==
A model of the under-development lunar lander was unveiled at an exhibition to mark three decades of China's human spaceflight program on 24 February 2023 at the National Museum of China in Beijing.
The physical model of the under-development lander, when considered together with the presentation by Zhang Hailian on 12 July 2023, suggests the future spacecraft will have the following components: four 7500-newton main engines, numerous attitude-control thrusters for precise maneuvering, a stowed lunar rover capable of carrying two astronauts, docking mechanisms (for docking with the Mengzhou spacecraft), a crew hatch (for EVAs), a ladder attached to one of the landing legs, two solar arrays, various antennaes and sensors.
The estimated mass of the fully-fuelled landing segment (lunar-lander plus propulsion-stage) is 26,000 kg (57,000 lb). According to Wang Xiaolei (王晓磊) of the Fifth Academy of China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation in August 2025, the Lanyue lander will be capable of automatic detection of lunar surface hazards and will autonomously maneuver to avoid said obstacles: "...the lander (can) automatically identify and avoid obstacles, autonomously selecting a suitable landing site for a safe touchdown." ("...着陆器自动识别并避开障碍，自主选择合适的降落地点安全着陆。") 


=== Lunar rover ===
Models of the crewed lander includes a four-wheeled rover stowed on the lander's external wall. CMSA previously issued an open call to private, public, and educational institutions to submit development plans for the future lunar rover; according to CMSA, fourteen groups submitted proposals in response to the open solicitation and eleven of the fourteen proposals advanced to the expert-review stage. On 24 October 2023, CMSA announced that two of the remaining eleven submitted proposals have advanced to the detailed design phase while another six groups will receive continued support to enable them to continue research into innovative aspects of their proposals. On 29 October 2024, CMSA awarded contracts to two teams (one team from the China Academy of Space Technology and a second team from the Shanghai Academy of Spaceflight Technology) to develop prototypes of the lunar rover. As of 2025 production work was underway and it was anticipated that a public call for proposed rover names would be forthcoming.
Survey of journal literature reveals that the planned lunar rover may incorporate "differential-braking" and "off-ground detection" technologies to enhance its anti-slip and steering-stability characteristics during high-speed traverse. Engineering prototypes have been built for design verification purposes.
The rover's planned mass is about 200 kilograms, and it will be able to carry two astronauts; it has a planned traverse-range of about 10 kilometres.


== Lander mission architecture ==

Under CMSA's crewed lunar landing plan, the landing segment initially will be injected into an Earth-Moon transfer orbit via the Long March 10 carrier rocket, and subsequently acquire lunar orbit under its own power. It then will await a lunar orbit rendezvous with and docking by the separately launched Mengzhou spacecraft (formerly known as the next-generation crewed spacecraft, the analog to the Apollo program's Apollo command and service module) whereupon two astronauts will transfer to the lander, undock from Mengzhou, and maneuver the landing segment for a lunar-landing attempt.
The landing segment's powered descent phase will employ a "staged-descent" concept. Under this concept, the combined lander and propulsion stage will begin descending from lunar orbit with the latter providing the necessary deceleration; when the stack is close to the surface, the lander will separate from the propulsion stage and proceed to complete the powered descent and a soft-landing under the lander's own power (the discarded propulsion stage meanwhile will impact the lunar surface a safe distance away from the lander). At the conclusion of the surface portion of the mission, the full lunar lander will act as the ascent vehicle for the astronauts to return to lunar orbit. According to a report by the Xinhua News Agency, the lander also will be capable of autonomous flight operations.
As of 2022, the landing system is envisioned to enable a six-hour stay on the lunar surface by two astronauts. It is unclear from the source if the quoted 'six-hour stay on the moon' references the lander's total time on the lunar surface or the astronauts' surface-EVA duration; if the latter, then the proposed surface mission duration would be comparable to those carried out by the United States' Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 missions. During the previously cited 2023 aerospace forum in Wuhan, Zhang Hailian also stated that a lunar surface-EVA spacesuit with an endurance period of no less than eight hours is currently under development.


=== Lunar EVA spacesuit ===
On 28 September 2024, CMSA unveiled a spacesuit designed to allow astronauts to conduct extravehicular-activities in the lunar low-gravity environment. The EVA suit has been designed to be lightweight compared to China's current Feitian orbital-class EVA spacesuit. The new spacesuit will protect astronauts from the radiation, thermal variations, and dust that they will encounter in the lunar surface environment. The suit also allows an astronaut to perform movements such as squatting and bending in order to facilitate the performance of work in complex lunar topography. A public competition to name the new spacesuit is currently underway.


== Potential landing sites ==
Members of the Chinese Academy of Sciences have begun site selection research ("suggestions") for the anticipated crewed lunar exploration program. Thirty prime landing sites have been identified (narrowed down from a preliminary list of 106 and an interim list of 50); the thirty sites are located in both the lunar north and south polar regions as well as in the lunar near and far sides. Numerous criteria, intended to maximize mission scientific value while taking into account crew safety and engineering feasibility, were considered by the team. Examples of the 30 prime sites include the following: Ina crater/depression, Reiner Gamma, and Rimae Bode on the lunar near side, Apollo basin, Aitken crater, and Mare Moscoviense on the lunar far side, Shackleton crater in the lunar south polar region, and Hermite crater in the lunar north polar region.
In mid-February 2025, news reports suggest that initial crewed landing attempts may target low-latitude lunar regions such as the equator; these reports were prompted by a February 2025 project announcement issued by the CMSA for proposals to construct a lunar remote sensing satellite "... to obtain high-precision topographic and geomorphic data of the moon’s low-latitude regions, map key mineral resource distributions, and identify characteristic minerals."  The satellite is intended to support future crewed lunar landings.


== Earth-Moon trajectory design ==
Preliminary trajectory designs based on specific landing sites and landing periods have also been carried out by a team from the Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics and from the China Astronaut Research and Training Center. In particular, the team analyzed possible Earth-Moon transfer trajectories based on seven potential landing sites, including Rimae Bode, a series of lunar rilles west of the Bode crater, and Mare Moscoviense, covering the period from 2027 until 2037. The analysis employed a dynamic weighting method that quantified mission efficiency factors and engineering constraints, combined with the application of a pseudostate trajectory model to optimize the computational efficiency of trajectory design and landing site/time selection; the pseudostate trajectory model was proposed by J. S. Wilson in 1969 and is recognized to be computationally more efficient than the traditional patched-conic method of trajectory design.


== See also ==
Apollo Lunar Module
LK (spacecraft) – Soviet crewed lunar lander
Altair – the crewed lander component of NASA's cancelled Constellation program
Starship HLS – SpaceX's lunar lander variant of the Starship spacecraft
Blue Moon – Blue Origin's crewed lunar lander
List of crewed lunar lander designs
Comparison of crewed space vehicles
Pseudostate trajectory model


== References ==