This list covers most artificial satellites built and operated by the Republic of India. India has been successfully launching satellites of various types from 1975. Apart from Indian rockets, these satellites have been launched from various vehicles, including American, Russian, and European rockets sometimes as well. The organization responsible for India's space programme is ISRO and it shoulders the bulk of the responsibility of designing, building, launching, and operating these satellites.


== Legend ==
This is a list of Indian (wholly or partially owned, wholly or partially designed and/or manufactured) satellites and orbital space crafts, both operated by the Indian government (ISRO, Indian defence forces, other government agencies) or private (educational and research) entities. All satellite launches marked successful have completed at least one full orbital flight (no sub-orbital flights have been included in this list).


== 1970s ==
Indian space missions began in the 1970s, with Soviet assistance in launching the first two satellites.

† In case of discrepancy in data between sources, N2YO and NASA NSSDCA is taken as the source of truth.
‡ Orbital Longitude is applicable only for Geostationary and Geosynchronous satellites.


== 1980s ==
India had three continuous successful satellite launches from its first generation rocket SLV. ISRO had two running projects for next generation rockets based on SLV:

ASLV to study and develop technologies to transfer satellites into geostationary orbit.
PSLV to transfer higher payloads into polar and Sun synchronous orbits.
ISRO did not have enough funds to run both projects simultaneously. Initial setbacks complexity led ISRO to terminate ASLV in just initial flights and focus on PSLV. Technologies to launch geostationary satellites arrived only in 2000s.

† In case of discrepancy in data between sources, N2YO and NASA NSSDCA is taken as the source of truth.
‡ Orbital Longitude is applicable only for Geostationary and Geosynchronous satellites.


== 1990s ==
From this decade on, Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) arrived that allowed India to become self-reliant in launching most of its remote sensing satellites. However, for heavy geostationary systems, India continued to remain dependent on Europe entirely. Capability to launch geostationary satellites will arrive in next decade.

† In case of discrepancy in data between sources, N2YO and NASA NSSDCA is taken as the source of truth.
‡ Orbital Longitude is applicable only for Geostationary and Geosynchronous satellites.


== 2000s ==
ISRO's workhorse, the PSLV, became the mainstay for successful launches of indigenous satellites from India during this decade. India successfully launched 11 geostationary or geosynchronous satellites during this period, which was equal to the total number of similar launches in the previous 2 decades put together. India's first extra terrestrial mission was also successfully executed during this period.

† In case of discrepancy in data between sources, N2YO and NASA NSSDCA is taken as the source of truth.
‡ Orbital Longitude is applicable only for Geostationary and Geosynchronous satellites.
§ All orbital data related to Chandrayaan-1 is for its lunar orbit only.


== 2010s ==
While India had to face failure in launching relatively heavier satellites early on in the decade, it did end up launching 27 geosynchronous/geostationary satellites (17 with indigenous, and 10 with European launchers). In 2010s, it managed to launch most of its geosynchronous/geostationary satellites successfully on its own. This period also saw India enter the exclusive club of nations capable of launching probes to Mars. ISRO also improved upon its student/university outreach by launching multiple pico-, nano- and mini-satellites from various Indian universities. This period was also marked by multiple bilateral collaborations with foreign universities and research organizations. The same decade saw completion of NAVIC, India's regional navigation system.
Increased subcontracting to private vendors across the nation improved launch frequency by a factor of more than 2. India was able to fix glitches and operationalise its Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle with an indigenous upper stage and operationalise next generation launch vehicle LVM3 with nearly double payload capacity, enabled the country to launch nearly all of its communication satellites. India launched its delayed Moon mission Chandrayaan-2 in 2019 which however failed to conduct soft landing on lunar surface. India also demonstrated capability to destroy "enemy" satellites in orbit. Increased application of India's space capabilities in strengthening its national security was observed.
Substantial increase in budget over the decade, increased payload capacity with increased reliability, increased launch frequency and many "firsts" in this decade had made Indian space program far more visible to world with significant coverage from international media and its hyphenation with leading spacefaring nations. The last launch of the decade marked with completion of 50 launches of PSLV rocket.

† In case of discrepancy in data between sources, N2YO and NASA NSSDCA is taken as the source of truth.
‡ Orbital Longitude is applicable only for Geostationary and Geosynchronous satellites.
§ All orbital data related to Mangalyaan-1 is for its Martian orbit only.
§ All orbital data related to Chandrayaan-2 is for its lunar orbit only.


== 2020s ==
ISRO aims to increase the launch frequency to 12+ a year, ISRO launched two extraterrestrial exploration missions in 2023 - Aditya L1 amd Chandrayaan-3, while it has planned several others including Chandrayaan-4, Lunar Polar Exploration Mission, Shukrayaan-1 and Mars Lander Mission for this decade. A mission to Jupiter after Shukrayaan and a mission to explore beyond Solar System have also been proposed. PSLV is expected to undergo its 100th flight mission in middle of the decade. India's new low cost Small Satellite Launch Vehicle made its maiden flight  (SSLV-D1)  on August 7, 2022, which unfortunately ended in a failure. SSLV-D2, launched on February 10, 2023, became the first SSLV to launch satellites successfully. The SCE-200 rocket engine, expected to be the powerplant of India's upcoming heavy and super heavy launch systems, is expected to make first flight sometimes in middle of the decade. Conducting an orbital human spaceflight is the highest priority for the agency while the long-term goals of the programme include human-occupied space stations and crewed lunar landing.


== Forthcoming ==
Following table lists Indian satellites in development and due for launch in near future.


== Launch statistics ==
Following statistics are on the basis of number of satellites launched that were built-in or were to be operated by India. It does not account number of launch vehicles used or special orbital missions like re-entry that aren't taken into account as satellites. It also does not account foreign satellites launched by India.


=== Decade wise ===
The following bar chart lists number of Indian satellites launched decade-wise.


=== Country wise ===
The following bar chart lists the number of satellites launched based on the origin of the launch vehicle


== Other orbital and suborbital spacecraft ==


== ISRO satellites launched by foreign agencies ==
ISRO satellites which have been launched by foreign space agencies (of Europe, USSR / Russia, and United States) are enlisted in the given tables below.

ISRO satellites that were launched by foreign agencies, are listed in the table below.


== See also ==
List of foreign satellites launched by India
List of ISRO missions
Space industry of India


== References ==


== External links ==
Indian Space Research Organization: Spacecraft Archived 6 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine