The Mars race, race to Mars or race for Mars is the competitive environment between various national space agencies, "New Space" and aerospace manufacturers involving crewed missions to Mars, land on Mars, or set a crewed base there. Some of these efforts are part of a greater Mars colonization vision, while others are for glory (being first), or scientific endeavours. Some of this competitiveness is part of the New Space race.


== Rivalries ==
The race to Mars involves competition between manufacturers and nations. NASA has demurred in a potential rivalry with SpaceX or other manufacturers in any possible race to be first to Mars. It instead sees synergies in possible cooperation with such entities. However, politicians may push NASA into competition with private entities such as Boeing and SpaceX in getting humans to Mars. President Donald Trump has planned for NASA to reach Mars in the 2030s.
Boeing has stated that one of its rockets will lead to the first crewed expedition to Mars, before SpaceX or others will land a crewed mission. Boeing is the primary contractor on the U.S. Space Launch System (SLS) NASA rocket program that has the ultimate goal of a crewed Mars mission. SpaceX has declined to state that it is a race, or that it needs to race Boeing.
Blue Origin has stated that with its New Armstrong and New Glenn rockets, it may be attempting missions to Mars, head-to-head with the SpaceX Starship. This may result in commercial competition going to Mars.
Virgin Galactic has expressed interest in future service to/on Mars.
In 2019, SpaceX started to develop their own hardware, the Starship with initial launches planned for the early 2020s, followed by a cargo mission to Mars planned for 2027 and a crewed Mars mission in 2029 with the goal of setting up a propellant depot and the beginnings of a Mars base. As of 2024, Starship has achieved orbit in a successful flight test.
Inspiration Mars planned a crewed flyby of Mars using third party hardware but has been inactive since 2015.
It is widely thought that NASA and the China National Space Administration (CNSA) are in a tacit race to put humans on Mars. China is projected to have a crewed follow-up to 2020s robotic exploration project sometime after that; while NASA has a timeline of getting there in the 2030s.
In the 2020s, both the US and China are engaged in an effort to establish a permanent presence on the Moon, with an emphasis on the Lunar South Pole, as a proving ground and stepping stone to Mars. The US uses its Artemis program and China uses its Chinese Lunar Exploration Program.


== See also ==
Space Race
Moon landing
Exploration of Mars
Billionaire space race
SpaceX Mars Colonization Program


== Further reading ==
NBC News (21 May 2023), The Race to Mars, Meet the Press, NBC, cQl9f1FvgB4 on YouTube


== References ==