The Mengzhou (Chinese: 梦舟; pinyin: mèng zhōu), formerly known as the Next-Generation Crewed Spacecraft (新一代载人飞船; xīnyīdài zàirén fēichuán), is a type of reusable spacecraft developed and manufactured by China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation (CASC). The spacecraft prototype underwent its first uncrewed test flight on 5 May 2020.
The crew carrier is designed to conduct lunar exploration in conjunction with China's future lunar descent spacecraft, the Lanyue lander, by the end of the 2020s. A low-earth orbit (LEO) version of the spacecraft intended to ferry astronauts to the Tiangong space station is also under development; this LEO version will serve as a modern replacement for the existing Shenzhou spacecraft. The new spacecraft is expected to attain crewed flight capability around 2027–2028.


== Nomenclature ==
On the Chinese Lantern Festival (24 February 2024), a traditional holiday that celebrates family reunions and ancestral worship, China unveiled the official names of its new vehicles for its future crewed lunar exploration missions. The crewed spacecraft is called Mengzhou (Chinese: 梦舟; pinyin: mèng zhōu), meaning 'dream vessel', which indicates the role of the spacecraft in realizing the dream of landing on the Moon and exploring new frontiers in space. The crewed lunar lander is named Lanyue (揽月; lǎn yuè), meaning 'embracing the Moon', which signifies China's aspiration and vision to explore the lunar frontier and establish a permanent presence there.


== Overview ==

Intended to replace the Shenzhou spacecraft, the new vehicle is larger and lunar-capable. It consists of two modules: a crew module that returns to Earth, and an expendable service module to provide propulsion, power and life support for the crew module while in space. It is capable of carrying six astronauts, or three astronauts and 500 kg (1,100 lb) of cargo. The new crew module is partially reusable with its detachable heat shields, while the spacecraft as a whole features a modular design that allows it to be constructed to meet different mission demands. With its propulsion and power module, the crew spacecraft measures nearly 8.8 metres (29 ft) long. It weighs around 21,600 kg (47,600 lb) fully loaded with equipment and propellant, according to the China Manned Space Agency (CMSA). Lunar missions undertaken by the Mengzhou spacecraft and the Lanyue lander are planned by 2030.
The returned test vehicle was temporarily displayed at the Zhuhai Airshow in 2021.
On 29 October 2024, CMSA announced that a series of major ground tests have been completed on the spacecraft, including an integrated airdrop test.


== Test flights ==


=== 2016 ===
The debut flight of Long March 7 launched at Wenchang Spacecraft Launch Site on 25 June 2016 12:00 UTC with the scaled prototype of the Mengzhou test vehicle, called multipurpose spacecraft scale return capsule (Chinese: 多用途飞船缩比返回舱). The capsule returned and landed successfully in the desert in north China's Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, on 26 June 2016 07:41 UTC.


=== 2020 ===

The test flight of Long March 5B included two payloads. The primary payload was the next-generation crewed spacecraft test vehicle (Chinese: 新一代载人飞船试验船) and the accompanying secondary payload was the flexible inflatable cargo re-entry capsule test capsule (Chinese: 柔性充气式货物返回舱试验舱). Both payloads were launched successfully by the first Long March 5B rocket from the Wenchang Spacecraft Launch Site, on 5 May 2020 at 10:00 UTC. The test of the next-generation spacecraft included the evaluation of avionics, orbit performance, new heat shielding, parachute deployment and a cushioned airbag landing and recovery system. The short-duration orbital test flight concluded with re-entry and landing in remote northwestern China, on 8 May 2020.
The test of the secondary payload included the evaluation of the experimental flexible heat shield for cargo landing. The flexible inflatable cargo re-entry vehicle test vehicle was scheduled to perform re-entry on 6 May 2020 after performing orbit experiment, while the next-generation crewed spacecraft test vehicle carried out re-entry on 8 May 2020.
On 6 May 2020, the experimental cargo return craft, the flexible inflatable cargo re-entry test capsule, launched as a secondary payload on China's Long March 5B rocket, malfunctioned during its return to Earth on 6 May 2020. CMSA announced the cargo craft encountered an anomaly during re-entry and the investigation was carried out on the collected data. 
The primary payload, the unpiloted prototype for the country's next-generation crewed spacecraft, continuously raised its orbit before its landing on 8 May 2020. On 8 May, China's spacecraft successfully returned to the Dongfeng landing site in north China's Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region at 05:49 UTC, on 8 May 2020, according to the China Manned Space Agency. During the preparation of re-entry, the uncrewed spacecraft performed seven orbit-raising maneuvers to reach a final apogee of around 8,000 km (5,000 mi). The test vehicle finished de-orbit burn at 05:21 UTC, followed by the separation of service and crew module at 05:33 UTC. Before re-entering into the atmosphere, the capsule executed a skip maneuver employing aerodynamic lift in the high upper atmosphere, which extended the re-entry time for vehicles. This technique was used to prevent high rate of peak heating forming in short span of time when the vehicle conducted high speed re-entry such as from the Moon to Earth. After re-entering the atmosphere, the crew module deployed three parachutes to slow its descent (whereas the Shenzhou has one parachute) and airbags to cushion the landing. According to CASC, the re-entry velocity was higher than 9 kilometers per second.


=== 2025 ===
On 17 June 2025, CMSA conducted a zero-altitude abort test (also known as a "pad-abort" test) using a Mengzhou test article at the Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center. The pad-abort test was designed to verify crew-safety systems in the event of an emergency during the initial stages of a Mengzhou/CZ-10 launch. The test was deemed a complete success by CMSA. CMSA was also planning to conduct an in-flight crew-module escape test when the carrier rocket is experiencing maximum dynamic pressure during a launch sometime later in 2025.


== Mission summary ==
The China Manned Space Agency announced on 30 October 2025 that the first orbital mission (likely uncrewed) of the Mengzhou spacecraft will occur in 2026.


== See also ==
Lanyue (spacecraft)
Comparison of crewed space vehicles
Orion (spacecraft)
SpaceX Dragon 2
Boeing Starliner
Orel (spacecraft)
Gaganyaan


== References ==