O Canada is a Canadian adult animated television anthology series produced by and aired on Cartoon Network. O Canada was the first Canadian cartoon series to air on Cartoon Network. The show also aired in Canada on Teletoon. It features animated short films produced on Canada, including but not limited to adult animation.
Shown mainly on Sunday nights (early Monday mornings) at 12:00 midnight ET, O Canada featured a selection of animated shorts from Canada, mostly from the archives of the National Film Board of Canada. Some of the animated shorts featured were part of the NFB's Canada Vignettes collection of shorts first produced for CBC Television.
The title of the series originated from the name of Canada's national anthem, "O Canada".
One of the notable shorts featured in this series was Bob's Birthday, which would later serve as the basis for Comedy Central / Global Television Network's Bob and Margaret series, which would debut the following year. Despite its time slot, Bob's Birthday was censored with one scene, that featured Bob nude from the waist down, edited with a maple leaf electronically superimposed over his genitalia while other mature themes remain uncensored.
In 1997, Charles Solomon of TV Guide added this packaged series on the adult animated shows list and described it "a must for animation aficionados". Cartoon Network’s deal with NFB had since expired in 2002 in favor of Adult Swim.


== Shorts shown on O Canada ==
The Apprentice (L'Apprenti)
Arkelope
Balablok
Begone Dull Care
The Big Snit
Blackfly
Blowhard
Bob's Birthday
Cactus Swing
The Cat Came Back
Deadly Deposits
The Dingles
Dinner for Two
Emergency Numbers
Every Child
Every Dog's Guide to Complete Home Safety
Every Dog's Guide to the Playground
Evolution
The Family That Dwelt Apart
George and Rosemary
Get a Job
Getting Started
Hot Stuff
Hunger
La Salla
The Log Driver's Waltz
The Lump
No Problem
Oh Sure
Overdose
Pig Bird
Propaganda Message
Scant Sanity
Shyness
Special Delivery
Strange Invaders
Strings
The Sweater
The Tender Tale of Cinderella Penguin
To Be
Two Sisters
When the Day Breaks


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

O Canada at IMDb