Percy Jackson and the Olympians is an American fantasy television series created by Rick Riordan and Jonathan E. Steinberg for Disney+, based on the book series of the same name by Riordan. Walker Scobell stars as Percy Jackson, alongside Leah Sava Jeffries as Annabeth Chase and Aryan Simhadri as Grover Underwood.
Development on the series began in May 2020, following a pitch by Riordan to Disney Branded Television. Jonathan E. Steinberg and Dan Shotz were announced as showrunners in July 2021, with James Bobin hired to direct the first episode in October. Scobell was cast in the lead role in January 2022, with Jeffries and Simhadri joining the cast in May. Filming takes place in Vancouver, British Columbia.
Percy Jackson and the Olympians premiered on December 19, 2023, on Disney+, with the first season, adapting The Lightning Thief, consisting of eight episodes. The series was renewed for a second season in February 2024, which will adapt The Sea of Monsters, and is set to premiere on December 10, 2025, on both Disney+ and Hulu. In March 2025, ahead of the second-season premiere, the series was renewed for a third season, which is set to adapt The Titan's Curse. The series has received positive reviews from critics, who largely praised its faithfulness to the source material, worldbuilding, and cast performances, particularly those of Scobell and Jeffries. It received a leading sixteen nominations at the 3rd Children's and Family Emmy Awards winning eight, including Outstanding Young Teen Series and awards for writing and directing.


== Premise ==
In the first season, twelve-year-old demigod Percy Jackson is accused by the Greek god Zeus of stealing his thunderbolt and races to find it and restore order to Olympus.
In the second season, Percy returns to Camp Half-Blood a year later, where he learns that it is under threat from the forces of Kronos and Grover has gone missing, and must venture into the Sea of Monsters to find the Golden Fleece.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main ===
Walker Scobell as Percy Jackson, a young demigod and son of Poseidon
Azriel Dalman portrays a younger Percy (season 1)
Leah Sava Jeffries as Annabeth Chase, a daughter of Athena who has been training at Camp Half-Blood for five years
Jeffries's cousin Marissa portrays a younger Annabeth (season 2)
Aryan Simhadri as Grover Underwood, Percy's best friend and a satyr disguised through magic as a twelve-year-old boy
Dior Goodjohn as Clarisse La Rue (season 2, recurring season 1), a strong-willed daughter of Ares who bullies Percy
Charlie Bushnell as Luke Castellan (season 2, recurring season 1), a cunning son of Hermes and the counselor of the Hermes cabin who is later revealed to be working with Kronos


=== Recurring ===
Virginia Kull as Sally Jackson, Percy's selfless mother
Glynn Turman as Chiron / Mr. Brunner, a centaur disguised as Percy's Latin teacher. While the character mainly uses an enchanted wheelchair to disguise himself among humans, the character has a disability in the form of a brace in his hind left leg as a war injury. The creators made this change to address his disability, though they noted it would be "just a detail" during the first season
Jason Mantzoukas as Dionysus / Mr. D, the god of wine and curmudgeonly camp director of Camp Half-Blood. He is in this position as punishment from Zeus for chasing an off-limits nymph and has to substitute soda when he is also not allowed to have any wine.
Megan Mullally as Alecto / Mrs. Dodds, Percy's stern mathematics teacher who secretly serves the god Hades as one of the three Furies
Timm Sharp as Gabe Ugliano, Sally's husband and Percy's stepfather. Rick Riordan's wife and executive producer Rebecca Riordan stated that his abusive behavior, present in the book, was toned down for the show as its cruelty would be more "triggering and difficult to watch" on screen than on the page, and "this isn't supposed to be a horror show".
Andrew Alvarez (season 1) and Kevin Chacón (season 2) as Chris Rodriguez, a son of Hermes and Luke's half-brother. He joins Kronos' army alongside Luke.
Adam Copeland as Ares, the arrogant and daring god of war
Nick Boraine as Kronos, the King of the Titans who appears as a voice in Percy's dreams


=== Guest ===
Manoj Sood as Percy Jackson's second grade principal
Olivea Morton as Nancy Bobofit, a blunt teacher's pet who relishes tormenting Percy
Hiro Kanagawa as the unnamed headmaster of Yancy Academy. Kanagawa also portrays Kronos' headmaster form in a dream in "We Take a Zebra to Vegas".
Simon Chin as Eddie, the building superintendent of the apartment building that the Jacksons live in
Threnody Tsai as Sarah, a wheelchair-using demigod and skilled archer
Kathleen Duborg as Helena, a dryad and maternal figure for Grover
Jason Gray-Stanford as Maron, a member of the Council of Cloven Elders
Garfield Wilson as Leneus, a member of the Council of Cloven Elders
Jennifer Shirley as Pythia, the Oracle of Delphi whose mummified remains are in Camp Half-Blood
Sara J. Southey as Tisiphone, a member of the Furies
Jessica Parker Kennedy as Medusa, a gorgon who lives in solitude and has a past with Percy's father
Suzanne Cryer as Echidna, the menacing mother of monsters
Jelena Milinovic as Eudora, a Nereid who works for Poseidon
Cindy Piper as Clotho, one of the three Fates, the goddesses of destiny. She is the Fate who weaves a person's thread of life.
La Nein Harrison as Lachesis, one of the three Fates, the goddesses of destiny. She is the Fate who measures a person's thread of life.
Joyce Robbins as Atropos, one of the three Fates, the goddesses of destiny. She is the Fate of who cuts a person's thread of life.
Timothy Omundson as Hephaestus, the God of blacksmiths and forges who is strong, compassionate and merciful unlike the other gods
Lin-Manuel Miranda as Hermes, the Messenger of the Gods and the God of thieves and travelers who is charismatic and boisterous
Ted Dykstra as Augustus, an older satyr and acquaintance of Grover
Julian Richings as Procrustes, a son of Poseidon, Percy's half-brother, and a waterbed salesman who kills people by stretching them to the size of his beds. Richings previously portrayed Charon in the film Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief (2010).
Travis Woloshyn as Charon, the ferryman of the River Styx
Jay Duplass as Hades, the God of the Underworld who is a misunderstood genius and an outcast to his family
Toby Stephens as Poseidon, Percy's father and god of the sea who is stubborn and impulsive
Lance Reddick (season 1) and Courtney B. Vance (season 2) as Zeus, the ferocious King of the Olympians whose thunderbolt was stolen in the first season
Series author Rick Riordan makes cameo appearances in the first season as a teacher in the headmasters' office at Yancy Academy and as a statue at Aunty Em's Garden Gnome Emporium.


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 (2023–24) ===


=== Season 2 ===


== Production ==


=== Development ===

In November 2018, Rick Riordan stated that he believed he would have no creative control over a reboot of the Percy Jackson & the Olympians novel series by The Walt Disney Company if it were to happen, much like his experience with the film series with 20th Century Fox. In December 2019, Riordan pitched an adaptation of the novels to Disney, which had acquired Fox in March of that year. By May 2020, a Disney+ series based on Percy Jackson was in the works, with the first season set to adapt the first book in the series, The Lightning Thief. Riordan revealed in March 2021 that searches for the series' directors and cast was underway, with James Bobin being announced as the pilot episode's director in October. Jonathan E. Steinberg and Dan Shotz were also announced as showrunners in July.
The series was greenlit by Disney Branded Television in January 2022, with 20th Television and the Gotham Group producing the project. Steinberg, Shotz, Bobin, and Riordan were announced as executive producers alongside Riordan's wife Rebecca Riordan, Bert Salke, Monica Owusu-Breen, Jim Rowe, Anders Engström, Jet Wilkinson, Ellen Goldsmith-Vein, Jeremy Bell, and D. J. Goldberg. At the D23 Expo in September, Anders Engström and Jet Wilkinson were revealed to be executive producing the series as well. The same month, Riordan revealed that Engström would direct the third and fourth episodes while Wilkinson would direct the fifth and sixth. The series was reportedly made with a budget of $12 to 15 million per episode.
In February 2024, Disney+ renewed the series for a second season, which will adapt the second book, The Sea of Monsters. In April 2024, Albert Kim was announced as a new executive producer starting with the second season. The series was renewed for a third season in March 2025, which will adapt the third book, The Titan's Curse.


=== Writing ===
Drafts of the pilot episode were being reviewed by March 2021. In April 2021, it was announced that Steinberg would serve as co-writer and executive producer of the pilot alongside Riordan. The same day, Monica Owusu-Breen, Daphne Olive, Stewart Strandberg, Zoë Neary, Joe Tracz, and Xavier Stiles joined as writers. Each season of the series will adapt one installment of the book series, with the first season being an adaptation of The Lightning Thief. There are also plans to adapt additional material within the franchise for the series. In addition to writing the pilot, Riordan and co-showrunner Steinberg created a series bible for the show, as well as planning the plot for the first season and creating ideas for potential future seasons. The first season consists of eight episodes.
Writing for the second season had begun by March 2023. Plans for future seasons include a further exploration of Chiron's disability. Writing for the third season had begun by late February 2025.


=== Casting ===

Preliminary casting began in April 2021. In January 2022, Walker Scobell was cast in the lead role as Percy Jackson, with this being announced in April. The next month, it was announced that Leah Sava Jeffries and Aryan Simhadri would respectively portray Annabeth Chase and Grover Underwood, two close friends of Percy. Jeffries' casting received online backlash due to Annabeth not being depicted as black in the novels, which Riordan claimed was racism, and stated, "Once you see Leah as Annabeth, she will become exactly the way you imagine Annabeth, assuming you give her that chance, but you refuse to credit that this may be true." Logan Lerman, who played Percy in the film series, praised the casting of Scobell, Jeffries and Simhadri in their roles.
In June, Virginia Kull, Glynn Turman, Jason Mantzoukas, Megan Mullally, and Timm Sharp were announced to be appearing in recurring capacities as Sally Jackson, Chiron, Dionysus, Alecto, and Gabe Ugliano, respectively. The same month, Dior Goodjohn and Charlie Bushnell joined the cast in recurring roles as Clarisse La Rue and Luke Castellan, respectively, while Olivea Morton was announced to portray Nancy Bobofit in a guest role. Pro wrestler Adam Copeland was cast in the recurring role of Ares in October, while Suzanne Cryer and Jessica Parker Kennedy were cast in the guest roles of Echidna and Medusa, respectively. In November 2022, Lin-Manuel Miranda, Jay Duplass, and Timothy Omundson were announced to guest-star as Hermes, Hades, and Hephaestus, respectively; as were Lance Reddick and Toby Stephens in January 2023, announced to portray Zeus and Poseidon, respectively. Jason Gray-Stanford was cast in an undisclosed role in March 2023, later revealed to be Maron.
On July 25, Daniel Diemer was announced as the actor portraying Tyson during San Diego Comic-Con. On August 10, Sandra Bernhard, Kristen Schaal, and Margaret Cho were announced to be portraying the Gray Sisters during D23 Expo, with each of them portraying Anger, Tempest and Wasp, respectively. On August 15, Timothy Simons was announced as the actor for Tantalus. On September 23, Tamara Smart was revealed to be playing Thalia Grace. On November 10, the actress for Athena was revealed to be Andra Day during D23 Brazil. On November 25, Courtney B. Vance was announced as the replacement actor for Zeus, following Reddick's death in March 2023. On December 20, Rosemarie DeWitt, Aleks Paunovic, Beatrice Kitsos, and Kevin Chacon were announced in guest roles as C.C., Polyphemus, Alison Simms, and Chris Rodriguez respectively.
At San Diego Comic-Con 2025, it was announced that Levi Chrisopulos and Olive Abercrombie were cast as Nico di Angelo and Bianca di Angelo, respectively, the children of Hades. On an interview, Riordan confirmed that they were already in talks to cast Atlas, the season's villain. On August 21, 2025, Dafne Keen and Saara Chaudry were announced as the actresses for Artemis and Zoë Nightshade. On October 15, 2025, Kate McKinnon was revealed to be portraying Aphrodite.


=== Filming ===
Principal photography for the first season began on June 2, 2022, in Vancouver, British Columbia, under the working title Mink Golden, and concluded on February 2, 2023. The series utilized an LED stage powered by Industrial Light & Magic's StageCraft visual effects technology.
Principal photography for the second season began on August 1, 2024, in Vancouver and concluded on January 31, 2025. Additional location filming took place in Osoyoos and the Okanagan Valley.
Pre-production for the third season took place in July 2025. Principal photography began on August 7 in Vancouver and is set to conclude in March 2026.


=== Design ===
Dan Hennah serves as the production designer. Tish Monaghan serves as the costume designer for the first season. Catherine Adair serves as the costume designer for the second season.


=== Music ===
By October 2023, Bear McCreary had been writing music for the series, after previously working with Steinberg and Shots in the series Human Target, Black Sails and See. Members of the music company Sparks & Shadows, which McCreary was a co-founder of, were involved. The score for the series was released digitally by Hollywood Records on December 22, with Sparks & Shadows credited as composer and McCreary credited with writing the themes.


== Marketing ==
A teaser for the series was revealed during the D23 Expo in September 2022. Rotem Rusak of Nerdist highlighted how the teaser featured the opening lines of The Lightning Thief, while Kendall Myers of Collider noted the teaser's dark tone. A second teaser trailer for the first season was released on September 19, 2023. The trailer was released on November 16 and was viewed 84.3 million times in the first 10 days across all social media platforms.
The first teaser for the second season was revealed during the D23 Expo in August 2024. A second teaser trailer for the season was released on July 24, 2025, at San Diego Comic-Con. The trailer was released on November 6. The trailer was viewed 135.9 million times in the first 10 days across all social media platforms; a 60% increase compared to the trailer for the first season in the same timeframe. A special recap crossover with Phineas and Ferb, titled Phineas and Ferb Recap: Percy Jackson, is set to premiere on December 6, 2025.


== Release ==
While the first season was initially expected in early 2024, Hulu announced episodes would be available to stream beginning December 20, 2023. The first season premiered on Disney+ with two episodes on December 19, a day earlier than previously scheduled. A red carpet premiere event was held in New York City at the Metropolitan Museum of Art on December 13 and at the Odeon Luxe Leicester Square in London on December 16. Eight episodes were released weekly until January 30, 2024. The season made its linear broadcast debut on Disney Channel on May 2, 2025.
The second season is scheduled to premiere on December 10, 2025, on Disney+ and Hulu with two episodes. A red carpet premiere event was held in Los Angeles at the Academy Museum of Motion Pictures on December 3.


== Reception ==


=== Viewership ===
In December 2023, Disney announced that 13.3 million viewers watched the premiere episode in its first six days on Disney+ and Hulu. In January 2024, Disney announced that 26.2 million viewers watched the premiere episode after three weeks. The second through fifth episodes each amassed at least 10 million viewers after seven days. In total, the series was streamed for 110 million hours over seven weeks on Disney+ and Hulu. According to Whip Media's TV Time, Percy Jackson and the Olympians was the most streamed original television series across all platforms in the United States during the weeks ending on January 28, 2024, and February 4, 2024. Through May 10, 2024, the first season was the most watched Disney+ original series with 23.3% of audience viewership. By the end of 2024, the first season remained the most watched Disney+ original series of the year according to Luminate Data, with 3.07 billion minutes of watch time in the U.S. within the span of December 29, 2023, to December 31, 2024.


=== Critical response ===
For the first season, on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 91% of 65 critics' reviews are positive. The website's consensus reads: "A faithful adaptation of Rick Riordan's novels, Percy Jackson and the Olympians is a lovingly realized odyssey through adolescence and myth." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 73 out of 100 based on 26 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Nicole Drum of ComicBook.com wrote "Some of the best casting ever in a television series, fantastic performances, and even the magic of the visuals and world-building, the series is about as perfect a television adaptation as you can get, as if it's been favored by the gods themselves." Matthew Creith of TheWrap praised the writing, describing it as "quick-witted, the action is stellar, and making Percy's journey an episodic tale helps to propel the young character forward in exciting directions." Kathryn Porter of Paste wrote, "From the casting to the writing to the production design, we get the adaptation of The Lightning Thief that we have been wanting for over a decade to see, and there is nowhere to go but up." Aramide Tinubu of Variety wrote, "The series depicts a genuinely inclusive world, showcasing storylines and characters that will captivate fans for the next decade. At long last, Riordan's work has been given the extensive visual adaptation it deserves."
On Rotten Tomatoes, the second season holds an approval rating of 100% based on 7 critic reviews.


=== Accolades ===


== Documentary special ==
In January 2024, Disney+ announced the behind-the-scenes documentary A Hero's Journey: The Making of Percy Jackson and the Olympians, which premiered alongside the first-season finale on January 30, 2024.


== Companion podcast ==
Disney Entertainment Television is set to release a companion video podcast for the second season through Disney+, Hulu, YouTube, and various podcast platforms.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Percy Jackson and the Olympians on Disney+ 
Percy Jackson and the Olympians at IMDb