SheZow is an animated superhero comedy television series created by Obie Scott Wade. Inspired by Shazam!, the series features the adventures of a boy who inadvertently inherits the role of a superheroine, which imposes an explicitly feminine theme to his costumed appearance and equipment. It began airing on Network Ten in Australia on 15 December 2012. The series is aimed at children from 6 to 11 years old. Produced by Moody Street Kids and Kickstart Productions, it is distributed by DHX Media, and funded in part by Film Victoria. It was designed by Australian artist Kyla May.
As of December 2013, 52 eleven-minute episodes have been made, which are broadcast in pairs to make one season of 26 half-hour episodes. In a 2013 interview, Wade expressed interest in making a second season.
In a 2016 interview, Wade mentioned that he went on to start production of season 2 of SheZow at Hub Network with a bigger budget than the first season. However, after Hub Network went under a major rebranding to Discovery Family, Wade was informed that SheZow season 2's production came to a halt. However, Wade had mentioned that there would be a comic series of SheZow released under his own company, Obieco Entertainment. He released the debut Issue of the SheZow comic series sometime in 2015. Wade had also mentioned that the second issue would release the next year after Issue #1 on Christmas. As of February 2024, Issue #2 was never published.


== Synopsis ==
The series' protagonist, a 12-year-old boy named Guy Hamdon, discovers the superheroine SheZow's ring of power inherited from his late Aunt Agnes; then subsequently puts it on as a mocking lark, and finds himself transformed into a female costumed crime-fighter by uttering the phrase "You Go Girl!"
As it is now on his finger, and thus also cannot be removed as a result, Guy uses the power ring to become SheZow; but while it does grant him superpowers, it was only meant to be worn by a girl, so Guy must wear a female superhero costume and pretend that he is a girl while fighting crime. His twin sister, Kelly, assists him primarily at the secret "She-Lair" through remote connection, and Guy's goofy best friend, Maz Kepler, tries to help in his ineffectual way.


== Voice cast ==
Jacquie Brennan as Sheila, Tara, Grilla, Null, Madame Curiador
Lyall Brooks as Brian Smirk, Tattoosalla, Coldfinger, Mocktopus, Wackerman, Senior Yo-Yo, Count Pussenbite, Mister Cylinder, Mega Monkey, Caped Koala, Crash Thunder, Aristotle, Brouhaha, Dr. Frankenweather, Fibberachee, Maj. Attitude, Manny Ken, Void, Periwinkle, Spit Bubble, Moocher, Pirate Posse, Dudley, Kelli, Captain XL, Mayor Stanley, Link, Sarcazmo, Wishington, Tad, McSniff, Legal Cat
David Myles Brown as Guy/SheZow (Australia & New Zealand only),  Moocher, Pirate Posse
Dan Hamill as Officer Boxter, Candy Rapper, Le Pigeon, Moocher, Freddie Fartonavich
Matt Hill as Maz
Diana Kaarina as Kelly
Justin Kennedy as Big Chow Slim
Elizabeth Nabben as Droosha, Aunt Agnes, Mrs. Creature, Baby Scarington, Uma Thermal
Cecelia Ramsdale as Gal/DudePow, Maizy, Wanda
Sam Vincent as Guy/SheZow (outside Australia & New Zealand), SheZap


=== Crew ===
Terry Klassen – voice supervisor
Dale Warren – voice director / sound designer / sound mixer


== Development and production ==

The concept was originally created by Obie Scott Wade as a short film for Disney Channel's Shorty McShorts' Shorts in 2007, which in turn was based on a more adult-oriented short of his named SheeZaam.
In a 2013 interview, Wade stated that the inspiration for SheZow was based on his experiences of watching Saturday-morning cartoons and a general love for superheroes. "When I was a kid I watched a show on Saturday mornings called Shazam! […] it was Shazam and Isis and I just thought it would be interesting to see what would happen if he accidentally said 'SHE-zam,' would he get a different costume or become a different hero?" He added that a lot of the facets to SheZow's mythology came about from the women writers on his team. "I asked the women on my team […] what would be a good weakness for a woman superhero and they all said, 'Bad hair!' […] A lot of the gadgets and jokes [for 'SheZow'] came from women."


== Episodes ==


== Broadcast ==
In the United States, it was added to the schedule lineup of the Hub Network (now Discovery Family) on 1 June 2013 and aired on Discovery Family until 27 December 2015. In the United Kingdom, the series was on Kix in 2016 (later became Pop Max). It is shown on 10 Peach (formerly Eleven) and 7TWO in Australia. Series 1 was streaming on Netflix from 2015 to 2017.


== Reception ==
The show was considered controversial by several Christian groups for using cross-dressing and transvestism as a source of humour, with One Million Moms, an affiliate of the American Family Association being one of the groups targeting it. In response, series creator Obie Scott Wade stated, "SheZow is not transgendered. He's a boy, his gender never changes, he's just trapped in a silly costume." He also added that he does not find it child-inappropriate at all, because the idea came to him in his youth.


=== Controversy ===
SheZow has a gender-bending character named Guy Hamdon, who transforms into the titular character. However, the show gained attention from anti-LGBT activists who claimed that Guy would "confuse children about gender." However, LGBT advocacy group GLAAD stated that the show is appropriate and that the concept of a superhero having a new persona to be a crime fighter is "very familiar to children." The creator of the show, Obie Scott Wade, denied claims by those such as Ben Shapiro on Breitbart News on the show, stating that there was no "political agenda," and that the critics were reading "a lot into it," saying that the show focuses more on the responsibility of the protagonist and "less about gender." He also said that gender issues were not explored much in the show, and stated in another interview that "SheZow is not transgendered" but is a boy whose gender "never changes" as he is trapped "in a silly costume."


== References ==


== External links ==
SheZow at IMDb
SheZow on ABC ME
Kix Homepage Archived 11 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine
SheZow's Final Homepage on the Hub Network via Wayback Machine