Star Chinese Channel (Chinese: 衛視中文台) was a Taiwanese general entertainment television channel operated by The Walt Disney Company (Taiwan) Ltd. Its programming featured dramas, variety shows, lifestyle programs, and talk shows in Mandarin.
Launched on 21 October 1991 at 16:30 Hong Kong Time by its predecessor, Star TV, the channel initially targeted audiences in Greater China, broadcasting in both Mandarin and Cantonese. However, on 30 March 1996, it reduced its broadcasting area to Taiwan and switched to Mandarin-only programming.
Star Chinese Channel, along with its sister channel, Star Entertainment Channel, ceased operations on 1 January 2024, as Disney further expanded its Disney+ streaming platform.


== History ==
The fourth of the five original channels of Star TV, Star Chinese Channel was launched on 21 October 1991 at 16:30 Hong Kong Time as STAR TV Chinese Channel. Initially, it targeted audiences across Greater China, broadcasting in both Mandarin and Cantonese.
Star Chinese Channel was introduced as a 24-hour Mandarin-language variety entertainment channel, featuring full Chinese-language content primarily provided by ATV in Hong Kong and broadcasting from Mainland China. It also aired television series from other regions in Greater China, including China, Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan, and Singapore. Additionally, it was the first commercially owned television channel to broadcast in Taiwan.
Originally a free-to-air channel, Star TV later encrypted its signal. Until 30 March 1996 at 19:00 Hong Kong Time, the channel was broadcast across Greater China. On that date, Star TV regionalized STAR TV Chinese Channel, reducing its broadcast area to Taiwan only. Viewers outside Taiwan were instead provided access to Phoenix Chinese Channel.
At one point, the channel's operations were relocated from British Hong Kong to Taipei on 30 June 1997.
Shiau Hong-chi stated that Star TV's original business strategy was to broadcast popular American shows to Taiwanese audiences with minimal effort. However, he argued that this plan was unsuccessful, forcing Star TV to invest in localized branches such as Star Chinese Channel and Channel V Taiwan, as well as produce local programming.
As Disney, which had previously acquired FOX International Networks, decided to further expand Disney+ across Asian markets, it made the decision to shut down its entire cable TV network, including Star Chinese Channel.
The channel had already ceased operations in Southeast Asia, Hong Kong, and Macau on 1 October 2023, while Taiwan was the final market to see its closure. Star Chinese Channel, along with its sister channel Star Entertainment Channel, officially shut down in Taiwan on 1 January 2024. Following its closure, the channel in Taiwan was later replaced by KMTV.


== Feeds ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (Taiwan)