Tiny Toon Adventures is an American animated television series created by Tom Ruegger and produced by Warner Bros. Animation. It was the first animated series by Warner Bros. Animation to be produced in association with Amblin Entertainment. The show follows the adventures of a group of young cartoon characters who attend Acme Looniversity to become the next generation of characters from the Looney Tunes series.
Originated as an idea by Terry Semel, Semel proposed a new series that included either young versions of the original Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies characters or new characters as the offspring of the characters. With Steven Spielberg involved in the creation, it was decided that the characters would be similar to the Looney Tunes characters with no relation. It was developed as a feature length film for two years before it became a television series. After character design sessions and story meetings, full production began in April 1989, with Spielberg approving every aspect of production on each episode. The pilot episode "The Looney Beginning" aired as a prime-time special on CBS on September 14, 1990, before the series aired episodes in first-run syndication for the first two seasons. The final season aired on Fox under the Fox Kids programming block.
Critics lauded Tiny Toon Adventures for its animation, cinematic techniques, concept, humor, soundtrack, voice cast, and writing. The series won seven Daytime Emmy Awards of eight nominations, one Young Artist Award of two nominations, and one Environmental Media Award. The series was also nominated for two Annie Awards and one Primetime Emmy Award. A feature-length film Tiny Toon Adventures: How I Spent My Vacation was released on direct-to-video on March 11, 1992, on VHS and Laserdisc, and two specials were released in 1994 and 1995. The Plucky Duck Show, a spin-off television series, was created for Fox Kids and ran for one season. A second spin-off series Pinky, Elmyra & the Brain ran on Kids' WB for one season. A rebooted series Tiny Toons Looniversity was premiered on September 8, 2023, on Max and the next day on Cartoon Network.


== Premise ==


=== Setting ===
Tiny Toon Adventures is a cartoon set in the fictional town of Acme Acres, where most of the Tiny Toons and Looney Tunes characters live. The characters attend Acme Looniversity, a school whose faculty primarily consists of the mainstays of the classic Warner Bros. cartoons, such as Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Porky Pig, Sylvester the Cat, Wile E. Coyote and Elmer Fudd. In the series, the university is founded to teach cartoon characters how to become funny. The school is not featured in every episode, as not all of its storylines revolve around it.
As with the original Looney Tunes cartoon shorts, the series uses cartoon violence (e.g. anvils falling on someone, liberal use of explosives) and slapstick. Some episodes feature sequels to the original Looney Tunes cartoon shorts. Other episodes parody contemporary films released at the time. The series also parodies and references the events of the early 1990s and Hollywood culture. Occasionally, episodes delve into veiled ethical and morality stories of ecology, self-esteem, and crime.


=== Characters ===

The series centers on a group of young cartoon characters who attend a school called Acme Looniversity to be the next generation of Looney Tunes characters. Most of the Tiny Toons were designed to resemble younger versions of Warner's Looney Tunes characters by exhibiting similar traits and looks. The main characters are Buster and Babs Bunny, two young rabbits with "no relation", their friends, Plucky Duck and Hamton J. Pig, and antagonists Elmyra Duff and Montana Max. They are accompanied by a wide variety of supporting and recurring characters, such as Dizzy Devil, Furrball, Gogo Dodo, Calamity Coyote, Little Beeper, Sweetie Bird, Fifi La Fume, Shirley the Loon, Li'l Sneezer, Byron Basset, Concord Condor, Fowlmouth, Arnold the Pit Bull, Mary Melody, and Bookworm, among others.
Feeding off the characters are the more traditional Looney Tunes including (but not limited to) Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, and Porky Pig. Most of the adults teach classes at Acme Looniversity and serve as mentors to the Tiny Toons while others fill secondary positions as needed.


== Episodes ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Originally titled Tiny Tunes, it was originated as an idea by Terry Semel, former president of Warner Bros., who wanted to "inject new life into the Warner Bros. Animation department" and create a series with junior versions of Looney Tunes characters. A repeated idea at the time, Semel proposed that the new series would be a show based on Looney Tunes where the characters were either young versions of the original Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies characters or new characters as the offspring of the original characters. In 1987, Warner Bros. approached Steven Spielberg to make a feature-length film based on Semel's ideas. While producer Tom Ruegger was having a phone call with Spielberg, Spielberg wanted new characters to reminiscent of older characters and include sensibilities of the 1990s. They eventually decided that the new characters would be similar to the Looney Tunes characters with no direct relation, with Spielberg involved with the creation of some new characters.
It was developed as a feature-length film for two years before it was decided that the best format would be television in December 1988, with Jean MacCurdy overseeing production of the first 65 episodes. On January 4, 1989, Spielberg officially announced the series in the public. By the same month, the production team was assembled with one hundred people, starting character design sessions and story meetings. After three days of meetings between MacCurdy, Ruegger, and animation artist Mitch Schauer, new characters were conceived and drawn. Ken Boyer and Alfred Gimeno designed the characters by emphasizing their heads and feet, while Jim Reardon, Tom Minton, and Eddie Fitzgerald created the names of the characters. Spielberg later approved the new characters and concept of the series.
Three months later, full-fledged production began, with MacCurdy and Ruegger hiring people from Hollywood. The series was produced under the Warner Bros. department with a budget of $25 million for the first season. For a year and a half, the first season was produced, with the animation department growing from 15 to 120 artists in many weeks.  Each Warner Bros. unit handled approximately 15 episodes of the first season. By late October 1990, production of the first season was nearly completed.
To handle production, Warner Bros. established several unit systems like the theatrical shorts. Working three or four times faster than the old Warner Bros. shorts, each unit handled a director presiding nearly every aspect of production and artists that work with the director of the unit. Many artists who worked with the formula of producing television animation in other studios had to be uneducated to produce a "free-form" style of the Warner Bros. shorts. Each episode took 34 weeks to be finished, including four to six weeks of preparation, 14 weeks of pre-production, and four to six weeks of post-production, and required a high budget of approximately $400,000 per episode. Spielberg worked closely with the production in terms of development of characters, personalities, designs, stories, and the overview of the series. All aspects of production required Spielberg's approval; Spielberg wrote and sent notes to the production if declined.


=== Writing ===
In March 1989, MacCurdy hired Paul Dini as a staff writer, who started by honing the characters before becoming a story editor. In late 1989, Sherri Stoner joined Dini as a story editor. After their individual phone calls with Spielberg, Dini and Stoner written several ideas of the story at an office to send them over and work together in a session. By April, Spielberg read the first five scripts; his observations were mixed, liking some scripts and disliking others. The series was initially intended to exclusively include shorts in all episodes, but it later varied from a set of shorts to half-hour episodes. "Buster and Babs Go Hawaiian" was co-written by Renee Carter, Amy Crosby, and Sarah Creek, who were fans of the series.
During the beginning of development, writing original stories with the characters was a challenge, as it did not need major focus on Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, and other Looney Tunes characters. Characters, such as the Tasmanian Devil and Foghorn Leghorn, were developed to represent adults that "talk too much or are stick-in-the-mud types" for the Tiny Toons to pit themselves. Because it was a syndicated series, the writers were able to use physical humor that was restricted by the networks in Saturday-morning cartoons. Despite the creative freedom, Spielberg declined Montana Max and other characters to use handguns and rifles. War toys, tanks, and bombs were also not allowed, keeping the violence strictly to anvils and dynamites. Adult humor was applied to carry the legacy of Looney Tunes.


=== Casting and recording ===
Voice director Andrea Romano auditioned voice actors for less than three months, choosing several voice actors during a long process of casting. The role of Buster Bunny was given to Charlie Adler for his energy to the character. During production of the third season, Adler left the show. John Kassir replaced Adler for the remainder of the show's run. The role of Babs Bunny was given to Tress MacNeille for her big vocal range, including Babs' voice impressions. Voice actors Joe Alaskey and Don Messick were given the roles of Plucky Duck and Hamton J. Pig. Alaskey briefly left for financial reasons, but returned when an agreement was reached with the studio. Child actor Danny Cooksey voiced Montana Max. Cooksey did a "tremendous mean voice" by screaming frequently. Cree Summer provided the roles of Elmyra Duff and Mary Melody. Maurice LaMarche voiced Dizzy Devil. When the series was announced, LaMarche wanted to work on a project produced by Spielberg but felt less optimistic about his chances, convincing that there was no way of getting a role since he was a "shloob".
Mel Blanc was initially under consideration to reprise his roles as many Looney Tunes characters. After Blanc died in July 1989, the issue remained unsolved on whether to use Blanc's archival recordings of the characters. Jeff Bergman replaced Blanc as the voice of several Looney Tunes characters. Stan Freberg reprised his roles as Junior Bear, Pete Puma, and other characters. Other cast members included Frank Welker, Candi Milo, Gail Matthius, and Noel Blanc. Guest stars included Vincent Price as the voice of Edgar Allan Poe and Carol Kane as a duck from outer space. Starting in 1989, recording sessions were held at B&B Sound in Burbank, California. Usually directed by Ruegger and Romano, an animation director also handled the sessions depending on its schedule. Occasionally, episodes were re-recorded with a different reading to revise the tone and lines.


=== Storyboards, designs, and layouts ===
Reardon, Minton, and Fitzgerald drew the storyboards, with Spielberg pushing the storyboards for more depth and angles. A storyboard artist was assigned by the director to illustrate one-act storyboard panels of an episode for two weeks. Meanwhile, the director or a model artist of an episode designed the characters and props. Once it was finished, the storyboard was sent to Boyer for review before sending it to Amblin Entertainment for approval. Occasionally, Spielberg declined the storyboards, demanding the episodes to be rewritten.
For two weeks, layouts were done to translate into animation by listening to the vocal performances to match the drawings and rendering key poses. During the process, Boyer revised the storyboards by drawing thumbnail poses to fix missing beats between storyboard poses. Sometimes, the director of an episode was also the layout supervisor, checking on the registration, field size, and backgrounds.


=== Animation ===
With the use of 25,000 cels per episode instead of the standard 10,000 cels, Tiny Toon Adventures was made with a higher production value than standard television animation, allowing for more fluid movements. The animation included a higher palate of colors than most television animated series and carefully used camera techniques and the texturing of the characters. Because of the elements for time and speed, the production was unable to afford the Warner Bros. animation department to in-between, paint, and cleanup the animation. For two days during the production of an episode, the director collected the backgrounds, layouts, models, and keys for shipping, checking the exposure sheets against the layouts.
The animation, including in-between drawings, cleanups, painted cels, and shooting with a camera, was completed in Tokyo Movie Shinsha, AKOM, Kennedy Cartoons, Wang Film Productions, and an animation studio in Manila. StarToons provided the main animation of the episode "Henny Youngman Day" and five to six minutes of animation in 18 episodes. Warner Bros. executives were impressed, with Ruegger comparing StarToons' character animation to animation work done by Chuck Jones. To animate the episode "Henry Youngman Day", StarToons stumbled across rare posings and expressions taken from Chuck Jones' cartoons in the late 1940s and early 1950s. Although the animators occasionally added their own gags to the episodes, some animated shots had to be retaken due to errors in character designs, mistimed actions, wrong colors, or a character speaking another character's dialogue. Ruegger and the director of an episode examined the mistakes, with an animation checker writing notes to send back to an animation studio.


=== Music, sound effects, and post-production ===
Tiny Toon Adventures was one of the rare animated series to use individual scores for each episode. After an episode's animation was finished, a videotape of the episode was duplicated and created for the series' main composer Bruce Broughton. The episode's director or one of their assistants reviewed an episode with Broughton and told him the mood of the music, the types of instruments to use, and the sound effects to add. Using a large orchestra supervised by Broughton, no synthesizers were used, and none of the music pieces from other cartoons were recycled. During post-production, music and sound effects were mixed into an episode, and retakes replaced original shots in the print. Technicians cleaned up dirt, removed scratches, and balanced the color of an episode's final print on the telecine, completing an episode.


== Promotion and release ==


=== Marketing ===
Tiny Toon Adventures spawned several tie-ins and merchandise. In September 1990, JCPenney released children's clothing and other merchandise of the series. At the same time, parties featuring costumed performers of Buster Bunny, Babs Bunny, and Dizzy Devil were held at the Pompano Fashion Square, Palm Beach Mall, and Boynton Beach Mall. Starting in the same month, Landmark Books released the Tiny Toon Adventures book series, aimed for ages 2 to 9. In 1991, Quaker Oats Company had a tie-in with the series featuring cut-outs and activities.


=== Broadcast ===
The pilot episode "The Looney Beginning" premiered on September 14, 1990, on CBS as a prime-time television special. Three days later, the series started to broadcast in first-run syndication. In February 1992, it was announced that Tiny Toon Adventures would start to broadcast on Fox in September of that year. Two specials aired after the series ended. The first special "Tiny Toon Spring Break" aired on March 27, 1994; the second and final special "Tiny Toons' Night Ghoulery" aired on May 28, 1995. On September 11, 1995, the series stopped airing on Fox and moved to Nickelodeon, debuting on September 24, 1995, with a six-hour marathon and airing reruns on the network weekdays.


=== Home video ===
In 1994, Warner Home Video released three volumes of the series on VHS, with each one including two episodes. The first DVD release Tiny Toon Adventures: Season 1, Volume 1 was released on July 29, 2008. The second volume of the first season was released on May 5, 2009, on DVD.


== Reception ==


=== Ratings ===
Throughout the first season, Tiny Toon Adventures was ranked as the third highest-rated television show during the first four weeks of the television season, became the highest-rated afternoon series in November 1990 and February 1991, replaced TaleSpin as the most popular syndicated children's program, and surpassed the ratings of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, DuckTales, and TaleSpin as the most popular children's afternoon program. By November 1990, the series averaged a 37% share among children and 24% share among teenagers. After the series ended, the special "Tiny Toon Spring Break" received 7.7 million viewers.


=== Critical response ===
The show received generally positive reviews from critics. Noel Holston of Minnesota Star Tribune praised the animation and cinematic techniques, deeming the series similar to The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle and Friends and compared the adult appeal to TaleSpin. Television critic Jon Burlingame lauded the animation as the "best-looking in TV". Steve McKerrow of The Evening Sun reviewed that the series "looks as good or better than the old, pre-feature movie shorts." Television critic Chip Sudderth lauded the appeal of adults and children, characters, voice cast, and writing, but deemed the thirty-minute stories inferior to the lineups of three short cartoons.
Janice Kennedy of The Vancouver Sun remarked it as a "lovingly-crafted piece of artistry", highlighting the concept and techniques used in older Warner Bros. cartoons, such as more animated frames per minute, a live orchestration, and the "wisdom of old masters." Bill Mann of Oakland Tribune commended the series as "one of the funniest cartoon shows in years", lauding the animation and soundtrack. However, Mann criticized Plucky Duck's voice, deeming it "a bit disconcerting" and "a bad version of Mel Blanc['s] [Daffy Duck]." In January 2009, IGN ranked Tiny Toons Adventures as the 41st in their Top 100 Animated TV Shows list.


=== Accolades ===


== Franchise ==


=== Film ===

Intended to be a theatrical release, a feature-length film Tiny Toon Adventures: How I Spent My Vacation was released on direct-to-video on March 11, 1992, on VHS and Laserdisc. This was later re-edited and aired as part of the series, airing on September 5, 1993, on Fox Kids. It was released on DVD on August 21, 2012.


=== Video games ===

Since its debut, numerous video games based on Tiny Toons have been released. Nine video games based on the series were released after its original television run.


=== Spin-offs ===

The first spin-off series The Plucky Duck Show premiered on September 19, 1992, on the Fox Kids programming block. The second spin-off series Pinky, Elmyra & the Brain premiered on September 19, 1998, on Kids' WB programming block.


=== Reboot ===

A rebooted series Tiny Toons Looniversity was announced on October 28, 2020, through the Amblin Entertainment website, ordering for two seasons. Like the original series, Steven Spielberg returned as executive producer. Sam Register, Darryl Frank, and Justin Falvey also served as executive producers, while Erin Gibson was the showrunner and co-executive producer. The series premiered on Max on September 8, 2023 and Cartoon Network on the next day.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Bibliography ==


=== Books ===


=== Magazines ===


== External links ==

Tiny Toon Adventures at IMDb
Tiny Toon Adventures at The Big Cartoon DataBase (Archived August 6, 2014, at archive.today)
Tiny Toon Adventures at Don Markstein's Toonopedia