Wireless HDMI is the wireless transmission of high-definition audio and video signals between devices, using unlicensed radio frequencies like 5 GHz, 60 GHz, or 190 GHz. This technology eliminates the need for an HDMI cable, allowing users to transmit signals wirelessly between the component device and the display device. Wireless HDMI converts the HDMI cable signal into a radio frequency which is broadcast across the wireless spectrum. This allows for video source and display device to be in different rooms, without the need for cables. The technology emerged in the early 2000s.


== Examples ==
Proprietary protocols for wireless transmission, e.g., LG "Wireless 1080p", Philips "Wireless HDTV Link", Sony "Bravia Wireless Link", Asus "Wireless Display Connectivity", etc.
Proprietary video compression schemes that work over 802.11n and similar wireless interfaces
WirelessHD
Wireless Home Digital Interface
WiGig
Asus WAVI (Wireless Audio Video Interaction) wireless HDMI use  4 x 5 MIMO-channels with Two-Way Wireless USB Control.
In 2010, Toshiba began marketing the first Wireless HDTV (aka WiDi) device.


== History ==
Wireless HDMI systems emerged in the early 2000s. In 2006, TZero Technologies and Analog Devices created a wireless HDMI interface consisting of a transmitter and receiver, expected to cost less than HDMI cable. At CES in 2007, Philips debuted the first publicly available wireless HDMI system.


== Modern developments ==
Wireless HDMI systems have steadily grown in popularity. Supporters of this technology claim that it's beneficial for the use of projectors – citing its low cost compared to custom projector mounting solutions, as well as its ease of use. However, with the introduction of streaming sticks such as Amazon's Fire TV and Google's Chromecast into the market, users are increasingly opting for these options instead.  Streaming sticks come with their own remotes and user interfaces, allowing them to function as an all-in-one solution, something wireless HDMI systems cannot do. Despite the advent of streaming sticks, there are still developments in the area of wireless HDMI technology. For example, in 2020, a patent was sought by Shenzhen Lenkang Technology for a new form of Wireless HDMI system. This new device is to be smaller, utilizing a pin layout rather than a traditional power supply. The HDMI transmitter would be able to receive power through a custom HDMI interface, eliminating the need for a separate power supply, and reducing the size of the unit.


== See also ==
WirelessHD
Wireless Home Digital Interface
WiGig
WiDi version 3.5 to 6.0 supports Miracast;  discontinued
Miracast (wireless display technology), now a subset of the larger Wi-Fi Direct certification
IP based

Chromecast (proprietary media broadcast over IP: Google Cast for audio or audiovisual playback)
AirPlay (proprietary IP based)
Digital Living Network Alliance (DLNA) (IP based)
Cables for mobile equipment

Mobile High-Definition Link - MHL
SlimPort (Mobility DisplayPort), also known as MyDP


== References ==


== External links ==
The Main Wireless HDMI Transmission Protocols and Their Typical Products