Chukwuebuka Emmanuel Amuzie (born 5 February 1996), known professionally as Brain Jotter, is a Nigerian comedian, content creator, social media influencer and philanthropist.


== Early life and education ==
Brain Jotter was born on 5 February 1996, in Orile Iganmu, Lagos State, Nigeria. He hails from Imo State. Raised in Lagos, he completed his primary and secondary education there. Brain Jotter later pursued a degree in Business Administration at the University of Lagos and graduated in 2024.


== Career ==
Brain Jotter's career in comedy began during his secondary years, where he performed as a stand-up comedian at various live comedy shows. His early performances included appearances at notable events such as "The Unleashed" and "Pencil Unbroken" in Abuja. However, his major breakthrough came in 2020 when he started posting short comedic videos on Instagram.
Some of his skits have featured other Nigerian comedians, such as Mr Funny, Nons Miraj, Don Jazzy and Bovi. He is the brand ambassador for The Shawn Exchange, a company that deals in digital assets and cryptocurrency.
He started the 'Gwo Gwo' dance challenge which became popular on social media platforms. The dance challenge revived the song  "Ka Esi Le Onye Isi Oche" by Mike Ejeagha. In May 2024, he organised another show 'Outside box comedy show' in Abuja.
In November 2024, he headlined a Stage Play at the Ghanaian National Theatre titled “U Play me, I Play U” written by Efo Kodjo Mawugbe. 
He has also acted in several series such as Basketmouth's Papa Benji.


== Philanthropy ==
Brain Jotter has been widely recognized for his philanthropic efforts. In 2023, he raised awareness for a woman in need of surgery, leading to a successful public donation campaign that funded her medical treatment.
During his Outside the Box show in Abuja, a disabled woman’s life was transformed when the audience collectively donated over 20 million Naira in response to her story.
Following the viral success of the “Gwo Gwo Gwo Ngwo” challenge, Brain Jotter paid a visit to legendary highlife musician Mike Ejeagha and supported him with a gift of 2 million Naira.
In 2025, the superstar Brainjotter visited Sierra Leone on Eco-fest show that was held in Freetown, the capital of Sierra Leone. There he met most of Sierra Leone Supperstar.
In 2025, he took his charitable work further by launching Share the Grace, a web-based platform where underprivileged individuals could apply for financial support in areas such as health, education, and business, making philanthropy more accessible and transparent.


== References ==