Change Healthcare Inc. (known as Emdeon before 2015) is a provider of revenue and payment cycle management services that connect payers, providers, and patients within the U.S. healthcare system. As of 2011, the company operated the largest financial and administrative information exchange in the United States.
The company's headquarters are in Nashville, Tennessee, with more than 89 additional locations throughout the United States and the world, including Canada, New Zealand, Israel, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, and the Philippines.


== History ==


=== Change Healthcare (2007) ===
Change Healthcare was established in 2007 and was based in Brentwood, Tennessee. The company provided healthcare consumer engagement and cost transparency tools for health plans and large, self-insured employers, across the United States. The company was founded by Christopher Parks and Robert Hendrick with MedBill Manager. In January 2010, the company shifted its focus to the business-to-business market, and launched the Change Healthcare Engagement Platform.
In April 2011, Howard McLure, former president of CVS Caremark, came out of retirement to lead Change Healthcare as chairman and CEO. Doug Ghertner joined the company as president in July 2011. 
In December 2011, Change Healthcare closed a round of financing led by Mitsui, Sandbox Industries, BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners, and West Health Investment Fund. In September 2012, Ghertner was promoted to president and CEO while McLure assumed the role of executive chairman.
In July 2013, Change Healthcare closed on a round of Series D funding led by HLM Venture Partners and including new investor Noro-Moseley Partners, which infused $15 million into the company.  In July 2013, Change Healthcare was named one of Modern Healthcare’s “100 Best Places to Work in Healthcare."


=== Emdeon ===
In 2004, WebMD Corporation acquired Dakota Imaging, Inc. and ViPS, Inc.
Until August 2005, Emdeon operated under the name WebMD Corporation (NASDAQ: HLTH). The name was changed to Emdeon to avoid confusion with its then subsidiary WebMD, which started public trading under the stock symbol WBMD in September 2005. 
In May 2009, the company acquired The Sentinel Group, a vendor of software and investigational services to combat healthcare fraud. In January 2010, the company acquired Future Vision Investment Group, L.L.C. (FVTech), a provider of outsourced services specializing in electronic data conversion and information management solutions. In March 2010, the company acquired Healthcare Technology Management Services, Inc. (HTMS), a management consulting company focused primarily on the healthcare payer market. In June 2010, the company acquired Chapin Revenue Cycle Management, LLC (Chapin), a technology-enabled provider of accounts receivable denial and recovery services. In August 2010, the company acquired Interactive Payer Network (IPN), a technology service provider that acts as an outsourcing partner for Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)-compliant healthcare electronic data interchange (EDI). In October 2010, the company acquired Chamberlin Edmonds & Associates, Inc. (CEA), a technology-enabled provider of government program eligibility and enrollment services. In May 2011, the company acquired EquiClaim, a provider of healthcare audit and recovery services for commercial and government payers, from MultiPlan, Inc.
In August 2011, Emdeon Inc. was taken private for $3 billion by the Blackstone Group. Blackstone's offer of $19 per Emdeon share was backed by committed financing from Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Barclays Capital and Citigroup. Emdeon shares rose 13.6% the morning after the acquisition. Shares had risen 31% over the year prior to the announcement.
In May 2012, the company acquired TC3 Health, a cost containment provider that included payment integrity and out-of-network claims cost management for U.S. healthcare payers. In June 2013, the company acquired Gold Health Systems, a healthcare management organization that specializes in providing pharmacy benefits and related services primarily to State Medicaid agencies across the nation. In July 2014, the company acquired Capario, a healthcare technology provider.
In November 2014, Change Healthcare was acquired by Emdeon for $135 million. In November 2015, Emdeon rebranded to Change Healthcare.
In December 2014, the company acquired Admin Source Communications, Inc. In August 2015, the company acquired Altegra Health, a provider of technology and intervention platforms that combine data aggregation and analytics with member engagement and reporting capabilities.
In June 2016, McKesson Corporation and Change Healthcare Holdings, Inc., announced the creation of a new healthcare company which combined substantially all of Change Healthcare's business with the majority of McKesson's Information technology unit. McKesson owns approximately 70% of the new company with the remaining equity stake held by Change Healthcare stockholders. The new company retained the Change Healthcare name.
In October 2018, it was reported that Change Healthcare Corporation had hired underwriters and investment banks in preparation for an initial public offering (IPO) planned for the 2018–2019 time frame. On June 27, 2019, Change Healthcare Inc. began trading on the NASDAQ stock exchange under the ticker symbol CHNG, offering up to 49.2 million shares at $13 per share and raising over $640 million through its IPO.
In December 2018, Change Healthcare acquired the intellectual property and other key assets, including employees, of Charleston-based healthcare IT startup PokitDok.
In January 2021, UnitedHealth Group's Optum Insight unit agreed to acquire Change Healthcare in a deal valued at $13 billion, including assuming $5 billion of the latter's debt. Following delays due to regulator scrutiny, the acquisition closed on October 3, 2022.
In 2022, Change Healthcare and Luma Health partnered to launch a patient engagement service aimed at improving healthcare communication and access.


=== 2024 cyberattack ===
On February 21, 2024, the company was hit by a cyberattack that prevented payouts to doctors on the platform. As a result of the attack, electronic payments and medical claims could not be processed by UnitedHealth Group, leading to widespread disruption. Patients were forced to pay for many of their medications out of pocket instead of using medication coupons or copays. Many healthcare providers claimed significant revenue losses as a result of the disruption, up to $100 million per day, putting some in danger of insolvency. As a result of the cyberattack, HHS opened a civil rights investigation with regards to patient privacy concerns. Because of the large number of patients affected (190 million), researchers have raised concerns about the cybersecurity and national security risks posed by the extreme market concentration in the healthcare payments processing market. 
On February 22, 2024, UnitedHealth Group filed a notice to the Securities and Exchange Commission stating that a "suspected nation-state associated cybersecurity threat actor" gained access to Change Healthcare's information technology system. Following UnitedHealth Group's initial filing, CVS Health, Walgreens, Publix, GoodRX, and BlueCross BlueShield of Montana reported disruptions in insurance claims. Other companies affected by the cyberattack include Naval Hospital Camp Pendleton and athenahealth.
On February 29, 2024, UnitedHealth Group confirmed that the ransomware attack was "perpetrated by a cyber crime threat actor who...represented itself to [the company] as ALPHV/Blackcat." The company stated that it was "working closely with law enforcement and leading third-party consultants, Mandiant and Palo Alto Networks" to address the matter.
On March 4, 2024, Reuters reported that a bitcoin payment equivalent to nearly USD $22 million had been made to a cryptocurrency wallet "associated with ALPHV." United Health did not comment on the payment, instead stating that the organization was "focused on the investigation and the recovery." On the same day, a Wired reporter stated that the transaction looked "very much like a large ransom payment."
As of March 18, 2024, UnitedHealth Group had advanced payments of over $2 billion in assistance to healthcare providers affected by the cybersecurity attack. In addition, some services had been restored including Change Healthcare's payment processing platform and pharmacy network.


==== Response ====
On March 1, 2024, UnitedHealth Group's Optum division launched a Temporary Funding Assistance Program to assist with short-term cash flow needs for providers who received payments that were processed by Change Healthcare. The American Hospital Association (AHA) criticized the program due to its terms and conditions, specifically Optum's ability to recoup funds "immediately and without prior notification" and to "change the agreement simply by providing notice."
On March 5, 2024, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced financial flexibilities for hospitals impacted by the attack. The American Hospital Association (AHA) was critical of these measures, stating that the proposed flexibilities were "not an adequate whole of government response."
On March 12, 2024, UnitedHealth CEO Andrew Witty was summoned to a meeting by the Biden administration, which was attended by healthcare providers across the sector. During this meeting, HHS Secretary Xavier Becerra and White House domestic policy chief Neera Tanden urged UnitedHealth Group leadership to increase the amount of funding available to impacted providers.
As of April 16, 2024, UnitedHealth Group had advanced payments of over $6 billion in assistance to healthcare providers affected by the cybersecurity attack.
On May 13, 2025, Ordered by President Donald Trump an RFI (Request For Information) was issued and announced by the U.S. Department of health and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to help eliminate and identify unnecessary regulations, regulated and ordered prior to Donald Trump's term as president of the United States. This order, also known as a 10-1 deregulation order, allows and implements the relationships between patients, consumers, providers, and corporations to maintain and increase healthcare services for the public.


== References ==


== External links ==