Ergonode is a Product Information Management (PIM) system designed to help midsize and enterprise businesses, mainly in e-commerce manage and distribute their product data across all their sales and communication channels.
The company's office is based in Kraków, Poland.


== History ==
The company was founded in 2018 by Marcin Piwowarczyk in Kraków, Poland who serves as the company's CEO.
Ergonode was originally developed by a small internal team, which gradually expanded over the development period. The platform underwent approximately two years of internal development and testing. As it was initially an open-source product, it focused on significant community interaction and external contributions. In late 2021, Ergonode became an independent company and changed its business model to provide PIM System as a Service (SaaS). In late 2021, Ergonode became an independent company. This also coincided with a key investment from Marcin Grzymkowski, who sought a dedicated Product Information Management (PIM) solution for his new e-commerce project.
Due to Grzymkowski's investment, Ergonode is now focusing on expanding to markets like the United States, Canada, Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA), and the United Kingdom.


== Technology and features ==
Ergonode is designed on MACH technology and utilizes Microservices, API-first, Cloud-native, and Headless architecture, aligning with the principles of MACH (Microservices, API-first, Cloud-native, Headless). The platform offers three types of APIs: REST, GraphQL, and Event API.
Ergonode offers a commercial SaaS version. The system facilitates integrations with various platforms such as Magento, Shopware, WooCommerce, Shopify, and other headless storefronts.
In addition, since Ergonode is designed in the MACH model, it makes it open and easily scalable for businesses of different sizes and levels of digital maturity. Its key features include AI functionalities, media management, attribute mapping, and role-based permissions. The SaaS version is hosted in European data centers and is fully GDPR-compliant. 


== See also ==
Product Information Management
Digital asset management
E-commerce
Headless commerce


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website