Evil is an American supernatural drama television series created by Robert and Michelle King that premiered on September 26, 2019, on CBS, before moving to Paramount+ for subsequent seasons. It features an ensemble cast led by Katja Herbers, Mike Colter, and Aasif Mandvi as three individuals from vastly different backgrounds who are tasked by the Catholic Church to investigate possible supernatural incidents.
The series was produced by CBS Studios and King Size Productions and filmed in Astoria and Brooklyn in New York City. In May 2021, it was confirmed that the series would move to Paramount+, where the second season premiered in June 2021. The third season premiered in June 2022 and the fourth and final season premiered in May 2024, with the series finale airing on August 22, 2024.
Evil has received critical acclaim, with particular praise for its performances, characters, writing, direction, and cinematography.


== Premise ==
Skeptical forensic psychologist Dr. Kristen Bouchard (Katja Herbers), Catholic seminarian David Acosta (Mike Colter) and skeptical technology contractor Ben Shakir (Aasif Mandvi) are hired by the Catholic Church to investigate purported supernatural events. As time passes, the three find their personal lives increasingly intertwined with such events – and with individuals behind some of the incidents, such as Dr. Leland Townsend (Michael Emerson), a rival forensic psychologist who seems obsessed with Kristen and her family.


== Cast and characters ==


=== Main ===
Katja Herbers as Dr. Kristen Bouchard, a forensic psychologist who made a career as an expert witness, and is offered a new job as assessor by David. Kristen was raised Catholic and is an agnostic who does not believe in demons or the supernatural. She finds her skepticism tested many times as her new job leads her to walk a thin line between the unexplained and what science can account for.
Mike Colter as David Acosta, a Catholic priest and formerly a war journalist who struggled with addictions. He is an assessor, tasked with investigating and confirming events such as miracles and reports of demons, leading him to enlist the help of Kristen and Ben. A believer in the existence of both godly and demonic events, he has divine-like visions, which he achieves by taking hallucinogens, and is more inclined than the other two assessors to accept supernatural explanations. In season 2, he completes his training and becomes a priest.
Aasif Mandvi as Ben Shakir, an atheist raised in the religion of Islam who is the team's technical expert and equipment handler. A sarcastic, pragmatic man who looks down on religious institutions and belief in the supernatural, he tries to provide scientific explanations for the events the trio investigates.
Kurt Fuller as Dr. Kurt Boggs, a psychiatrist and Kristen's therapist who gradually finds himself involved in some of Kristen's encounters with the supernatural.
Marti Matulis as many of the creatures featured in the series, including the following recurring characters:
George, a demon who appears in Kristen's dreams, voiced by an uncredited Euan Morton
The "Devil Therapist" (seasons 1–2), a goat-like demon who is Leland Townsend's therapist, voiced by an uncredited Michael Cerveris
The "Manager Demon" (seasons 3–4), a five-eyed goat-like demon who is Sheryl's work supervisor, voiced by an uncredited Kevin Chapman
Brooklyn Shuck as Lynn Bouchard, Kristen's eldest daughter
Skylar Gray as Lila Bouchard, Kristen's second eldest daughter
Maddy Crocco as Lexis Bouchard, Kristen's third eldest daughter
Dalya Knapp as Laura Bouchard, Kristen's fourth and youngest daughter
Christine Lahti as Sheryl Luria, Kristen's mother. She is originally supportive of Kristen, but the two grow apart after she enters a relationship with Leland Townsend, who leads Sheryl to become increasingly involved with the demonic.
Michael Emerson as Dr. Leland Townsend, a forensic psychologist who is Kristen's professional rival and who seems obsessed with her family. Under his meek, polite behavior, he is a psychopath and worshipper who commits horrible acts and encourages others to do the same to spread more evil in the world. He looks down on religion and holds particular contempt for David and Sister Andrea. Although he hates being reminded of his origins, he was originally Jake Perry, an insurance adjuster in Des Moines.
Ashley Edner as Abbey (season 2; guest season 3), a succubus that taunts Ben during his dreams
Ciara Renée voices Abbey in a recurring role
Andrea Martin as Sister Andrea (seasons 3–4; recurring season 2), a smart, no-nonsense nun, who advises David and opposes Townsend. Sr. Andrea is Sister of Mercy and a devout Roman Catholic. Unlike most humans, she is capable of seeing demons when they walk the living world, and fervently faces them and the humans who worship them, notably Townsend, who immediately comes to hate her.


=== Recurring ===
Darren Pettie as Orson LeRoux (seasons 1–2), a convicted serial killer who is evaluated by Kristen
Brooke Bloom as Emily LeRoux (seasons 1, 3), Orson LeRoux's wife
Danny Burstein as Lewis Cormier (seasons 1, 4), Kristen's former boss and the D.A. of Queens, New York City
Boris McGiver as Monsignor Matthew Korecki, a distinguished priest who Kristen, David and Ben receive and report their cases to. Although the character dies in the penultimate episode of season three, Korecki makes a voice appearance in the season four episode "How to Build a Chatbot" as an artificial intelligence emulating Korecki.
Sohina Sidhu as Karima Shakir, Ben's sister and a tech expert
Clark Johnson as Father Amara (season 1), an exorcist and David's spiritual advisor
Noah Robbins as Sebastian Lewin (season 1), a young man targeted by Leland Townsend
Nora Murphy as Rose390 (season 1), a young girl avatar in a video game whose creator attacks David
Nicole Shalhoub as Vanessa Dudley (seasons 1–2), one of the co-hosts of the ghost-themed reality show "Gotham Ghosts" and Ben's on-again/off-again girlfriend
Li Jun Li as Grace Ling (seasons 1–3), a supposed doomsday prophet under investigation by The Catholic Church
Kristen Connolly as Detective Mira Byrd (seasons 1–2), a homicide detective in the NYPD and Kristen's friend
Patrick Brammall as Andy Bouchard, Kristen's husband, father of their daughters and a professional climbing guide who is often away from the family
Peter Scolari as Bishop Thomas Marx (seasons 1–2), a skeptical Catholic Church official who assigns David's cases prior to his ordination. His appearances in Season 2 were some of Scolari's final performances before his death in 2021.
Renée Elise Goldsberry as Renée Harris (seasons 1–2), a defense attorney working for the Catholic Church
Taylor Louderman as Malindaz (seasons 1–3), a popular YouTube beauty vlogger who is one of Townsend's clients
Brian Stokes Mitchell as Father Joe Mulvehill (seasons 2, 4), a spiritually exhausted exorcist suffering from a crisis of faith
Stephen Dexter as "Fry Guy" (seasons 2–3), a man that Kristen assaults after he was repeatedly rude to her, leading to the creation of a viral video
Brian d'Arcy James as Victor LeConte (seasons 2–4), an agent of The Entity, the Vatican secret service
Anthony DeSando as Father Rodrigo Katagas (seasons 2–4), a high-ranking member of The Congregatio pro Doctrina Fidei aka The Holy Office
Tim Matheson as Edward Tragoren (seasons 2–3), a sinister business consultant and friend of Townsend who romances Sheryl
Wallace Shawn as Father Frank Ignatius (seasons 3–4), a dying priest who is miraculously brought back to life after the weighing of his soul, resulting in a more spontaneous and exuberant behavior. After the death of Monsignor Korecki, with whom he shared a close and almost intimate bond, he is appointed to replace him as supervisor of Kristen, David and Ben.
Molly Brown as Leslie Ackhurst (seasons 3–4), the surrogate mother of Timothy, a child born from one of Kristen's previously harvested eggs
Gia Crovatin as Renee (seasons 3–4), Ben's girlfriend and the leader of the Yeshua People cult
Dana Gourrier as Yasmine Thomas (seasons 3–4), Kristen's attorney and friend
Chukwudi Iwuji as Father Dominic Kabiru (season 4), a senior agent of The Entity, the Vatican secret service
Fedor Steer as various creatures (season 4), including the "Massive Stick Demon", a "Great Evil Coming to New York" alluded to in previous seasons
John Carroll Lynch as Henry Stick (season 4), a Human disguise taken by the Stick Demon to pose as a clumsy and unassuming lawyer who acts as Leland's legal counsel


=== Guest ===
Dakin Matthews as Father Augustus ("177 Minutes")
Sanjit De Silva as Neil Benton, a hospital owner ("177 Minutes")
Hannah Hodson as Naomi Clark, a girl who was revived seconds after her autopsy had begun ("177 Minutes")
John Glover as Byron Duke, a Broadway producer who supposedly sold his soul to a demon ("3 Stars")
Dascha Polanco as Patti Hitchens, Duke's assistant ("3 Stars")
Luke Judy as Eric McCrystal, a boy suspected to be possessed by a demon ("Rose390")
Michael Stahl-David as Tom McCrystal, Eric's dad ("Rose390")
Heather Lind as Sara McCrystal, Eric's mom ("Rose390" & "O Is for Ovaphobia")
Karen Pittman as Caroline Hopkins, a woman on whom the Catholic Church performs an exorcism ("October 31" & "Exorcism Part 2")
Timothy D. Stickney as William Hopkins, Caroline's husband ("October 31")
Matilda Lawler as
Brenda, a mysterious girl in a mask ("October 31")
Mathilda Mowbray, a girl who, according to her adoptive parents, has pyrokinesis. ("F Is for Fire")
Chris Ghaffari as Tony Pacuci, one of the co-hosts on the show "Gotham Ghosts", alongside Vanessa Dudley ("October 31" & "2 Fathers")
Nelson Lee as Daniel Ling, Grace's brother ("Let x = 9")
Rocco Sisto, Pedro Carmo and Anthony Alessandro as Silvio, Vincent and Mateo, experts from the Vatican ("Let x = 9")
Annaleigh Ashford as Bridget Farrell, a woman who claimed to have killed a young boy while being possessed by a demon ("Let x = 9")
Dan Bittner as Dwight Ferrell, Bridget's Husband ("Let x = 9" & "Justice x 2")
Vondie Curtis-Hall as Leon Acosta, David's father ("2 Fathers")
Jennifer Ferrin as Judith Lemonhead, Caroline's lawyer ("Exorcism Part 2")
Jeremy Shamos as Phillip Lynch-Giles, Caroline's psychiatrist ("Exorcism Part 2")
Megan Ketch as Judy James, a former associate of David and Ben ("Room 320")
Tara Summers as Linda Bloch, a nurse and secret angel of death ("Room 320" & "How To Slaughter a Pig")
Marcus Callender as Harlan Zephyrs, a hospital patient, who was being targeted by Linda Bloch ("Room 320")
Gbenga Akinnagbe as Lando Mutabazi, a comedian ("Justice x 2 ")
Emayatzy Corinealdi as Sona Kamanzi, a woman who pursued Lando ("Justice x 2 ")
Jayne Houdyshell as Judge Sarah Carla Shire ("Justice x 2 ")
Laura Heisler as Eleanor Chakiris, a woman who claims to be pregnant with a possessed child ("Book 27 ")
Patrick Page as Father Luke ("Book 27 " & "The Demon of Cults")
Dylan Baker as Father Kay, one of David's teachers at the Catholic Church ("A Is for Angel" & "E Is for Elevator")
Jessie Mueller as Anya, a homicide detective in the NYPD ("A Is for Angel" & "C Is for Cop")
Brandon J. Dirden as Raymond Strand, a man who claims to be talking to an angel ("A Is for Angel")
Joniece Abbott-Pratt as Ashley Strand, Raymond's wife ("A Is for Angel")
Ben Rappaport as Brian Castle, Mathilda's adoptive dad ("F Is for Fire")
Zuleikha Robinson as Jane Castle, Mathilda's adoptive mom ("F Is for Fire")
Sevan	as	Sheikh Majed ("F Is for Fire")
Patrice Johnson Chevannes as Miss Marie, psychic readings ("Z Is for Zombies" & "O Is for Ovaphobia")
Wayne Duvall as Louie Wolff, member of the police union ("C Is for Cop")
Fredric Lehne as Mick Carr, director of the television series Justice Served ("C Is for Cop")
Corey Cott as Officer Jim Turley ("C Is for Cop")
Alexandra Socha as Fenna, a sister of Sacred Trinity Monastery ("S Is for Silence" & "Fear of the End")
Kenneth Tigar as Father Winston ("S Is for Silence")
Michael Esper as Cal, a scientist ("B Is for Brain")
Meera Simhan as Liyana Shakir, Ben's mother ("B Is for Brain")
Francesca Faridany as Cara Autry, a doctor from the RSM Fertility ("O Is for Ovaphobia")
Gus Halper as Graham Lucian ("I Is for IRS")
John Sanders as Bishop Jim Logger ("I Is for IRS")
Julienne Hanzelka Kim as Anita Iota, tax agent ("I Is for IRS")
Reed Birney as Father Thunderland ("I Is for IRS")
Ato Essandoh as Nathan Katsaris, a widower who claims his house is possessed by a demon ("D Is for Doll")
Michael Laurence as Gregory Beale, a layman who specializes in cleaning house of demonic entities ("D Is for Doll")
Taylor Trensch as Mitch Otterbean, a student is obsessed with cannibalism ("C Is for Cannibal")
Ruthie Ann Miles as Dr. Beverly Swan, a scientist conducting a soul scale experiment ("The Demon of Death")
Kayli Carter and Freddy Miyares as Amalia and Leo, a married couple experiencing sexual problems ("The Demon of Sex")
Lena Hall as Marie Taylor, a single mother claims she is demonically terrorizing her family with a viral social app ("The Demon of Algorithms")
Lilli Stein as Katie Schweiger, VidTap's tech ("The Demon of Algorithms" & "How to Train a Dog")
Michael Chernus as Dr. Paul Wimsimer, a scientist who studies the influence of cults ("The Demon of Cults")
Nate Mann as Henry Trezza, a guy who claims he is being stalked by a demon after investing in a stock tip ("The Demon of Money")
Peter Mark Kendall as Dr. Ethan Parquet, a Head Research Director at particle accelerator ("How to Split an Atom")
Carra Patterson as Emily Reinhardt, a scientist at particle accelerator ("How to Split an Atom")
Victor Cruz as Mateo Marcus, a worker at a particle accelerator facility ("How to Split an Atom")
Jeremy Crutchley as Father Agostino La Russo ("How to Split an Atom")
Tony Plana as Chet Garcia, farm owner ("How To Slaughter a Pig")
Patrick Breen as Father Dement ("How to Build a Coffin" & "How to Fly an Airplane")
Reg Rogers as Aiden Flowers, a parish lawyer ("How to Fly an Airplane" & "Fear of the Future")
Stella Everett as Isabella, a satanic dancer ("How to Dance in Three Easy Steps")
Isabella Briggs as Megan Tyree, a dance teacher cursed by Satanists ("How to Dance in Three Easy Steps")
Jefferson White as Tyrus, a train driver who saw a ghost on the way ("How to Bandage a Wound")
Sean Patrick Thomas as Tyler, a man who wanted to commit suicide ("How to Save a Life")
Rafi Silver as Myles Koppler, the head of the ethics department at LastConnection ("How to Build a Chatbot")
Richard Kind as Judge Jared Jeter, the court judge overseeing Leland's trial ("Fear of the Future" & "Fear of the Other")
Anna Chlumsky as Ellie, a mysterious woman threatening Kristen's family ("Fear of the Future")
Nate Corddry as Paul Stolee Jr., a man who believes his doppelganger has possessed him ("Fear of the Other")
Paul Guilfoyle as Archbishop Kirby, a Catholic Church official who administers the deconsecration of David's church ("Fear of the Other" & "Fear of the Unholy")
Denis O'Hare as Father Giovanni De Vita, a high-ranking member of the Palatine Guard ("Fear of the Unholy" & "Fear of the End")
John Christopher Jones as Johann Taupin, a genius-level physicist with ALS who is a wheelchair user. ("Fear of the Unholy")
Christian Borle as Neil, Taupin's secretary and a demon disguised as a human ("Fear of the Unholy")


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 (2019–20) ===


=== Season 2 (2021) ===


=== Season 3 (2022) ===


=== Season 4 (2024) ===


== Production ==
CBS ordered a pilot for the potential series in January 2019, created by the writing team Robert and Michelle King. Katja Herbers and Mike Colter were cast in February, with Michael Emerson and Aasif Mandvi cast in March. A series order was officially made in May 2019. A day after that, it was announced that the series would premiere in the fall of 2019 and air on Thursday nights at 10:00 p.m. during the 2019–2020 television season.
On July 18, 2019, Christine Lahti was cast as Sheryl Luria, replacing Deirdre O'Connell who was in the original pilot. On July 25, 2019, it was announced that Kurt Fuller, who guest starred in the pilot, had been promoted to a series regular. The series debuted on September 26, 2019.
On October 22, 2019, CBS renewed the series for a second season. The filming of the second season was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, but later began in October 2020 and was rerouted into a more "character-focused season." Filming concluded in June 2021. On May 18, 2021, it reported that the series would move to Paramount+ for the second season. On May 23, 2021, it was announced that the second season would premiere on June 20, 2021.
On July 8, 2021, Paramount+ renewed the series for a third season which ran from June 12, 2022, to August 14, 2022. Filming for this season started on November 15, 2021, and was completed in May 2022. It consisted of 10 episodes.
On July 5, 2022, Paramount+ renewed the series for a fourth season. Filming for the season started in December 2022, and was forced to stop earlier than expected in May 2023 due to the 2023 Hollywood strikes. The episode that was being filmed was the tenth, and filming resumed on it in December.
On February 15, 2024, it was announced that the fourth season will be the final season, that the producers were given four extra episodes to conclude the story, set to premiere on May 23, 2024. The extra four episodes started shooting at the end of March 2024 and wrapped at the end of May, and were later described by showrunners Robert and Michelle King, and star Katja Herbers as a mini-fifth season.


== Release ==


=== Marketing ===
On May 15, 2019, CBS released the first official trailer for the series. In September 2020, CBS announced that the first season would be made available on Netflix in October 2020 in order to generate attention for the upcoming second season. Evil left Netflix on October 1, 2021, due to becoming a Paramount+ exclusive. The first two seasons returned to Netflix on April 30, 2024.


=== International broadcast ===
Evil premiered in Canada on Global on September 26, 2019. CBS Studios International announced on October 22, 2019, that Evil would air in Spain on Syfy in January 2020. On October 29, CBS announced Evil would be available on Globoplay in Brazil on November 1. Evil premiered in Latin America on October 31 on Universal TV through an exclusive licensing agreement between CBS Studios International and NBCUniversal International Networks.
CBS Studios International has also signed a licensing agreement with French broadcaster TF1 Group for Evil to air in France, where it premiered on May 19, 2021. In India, Evil initially premiered on the streaming service Voot Select in April 2020, followed by a network television premiere on June 23, 2020, on Zee Café. In July 2020, the British pay television channel Alibi announced that they had bought the British rights to Evil and the show premiered in the United Kingdom on September 21, 2020. In Germany, the show first premiered on the pay television channel ProSieben Fun on August 7, 2020, followed by a free-TV premiere on February 17, 2021, on ProSieben. In The Netherlands, series 1 premiered on SBS9 on November 11, 2022.


=== Home media ===
CBS Home Entertainment released the complete first season on DVD on June 30, 2020. The complete second season was released on DVD-R on June 7, 2022. Season 3 was released in December 2022 on DVD and Blu-ray.


== Reception ==


=== Critical response ===
The review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 92% approval rating based on 50 reviews, with an average rating of 7.7/10. The website's critical consensus states, "Smartly-written and effectively unsettling, Evil works best when it dares to delve into the depths of the uncomfortable questions it poses." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 76 out of 100 based on 14 critics. The first season was named as one of the best television shows of 2019 by The New Yorker, NPR, and TVLine. In 2021, the show was named the best show on television by TV Guide.
At the 1st Critics' Choice Super Awards, the series received four nominations: Best Horror Series, Best Actor in a Horror Series (Colter, Emerson) and Best Actress in a Horror Series (Herbers).
The second season has a 95% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 20 reviews, with an average rating of 8.8/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Evil successfully slips into the streaming world with a spooky second season that doubles down on the scares without losing its sense of humor." On Metacritic, the second season received a score of 84 based on reviews from 10 critics.
The third season has a 100% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 15 reviews, with an average rating of 8.6/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "The forces of good and Evil continue to tussle in this sterling third season, where one of television's best procedurals amuses and unnerves with equal aplomb." On Metacritic, the third season received a score of 92 based on reviews from 7 critics.
The fourth season has a 100% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 16 reviews, with an average rating of 9/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Going out not with a whimper but a chilling cackle, Evil's final season dishes out more deliciously twisted self-contained mysteries while confidently building towards its endgame." On Metacritic, the fourth season received a score of 89 based on reviews from 9 critics.


=== Ratings ===


=== Accolades ===


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Evil at IMDb