Itautec is a Brazilian electronics company founded in 1979. It is part of Itaúsa, a Brazilian business group.
Itautec is an ATM, kiosk, and computer manufacturer in the Brazilian and South American markets. The company also has a key role in project deployment and IT services around the globe.
It mainly focuses on making consumer electronics, banking, and retail automation. The company has a large base of ATMs globally. Itautec is headquartered in São Paulo. The company operates a manufacturing plant in the city of Jundiaí (SP), and Itautec has 5,709 direct employees – 5,285 in Brazil and 424 abroad.


== Product lines ==
The company's product lines include:

Personal Computers: Desktop, tablet, and laptop personal computers
Monitors: LCD, LED, OLED, and touchscreen monitors
Commercial and banking automation
Software: Point of sale, credit card processing, an in-house Linux distribution called Librix, terminal management, digital signatures, and banking correspondence, among others
Services and Integration: Technical support, infrastructure, security, phone support, servers, and networks
Components: Printed circuit boards, Memory boards, and integrated circuits


== History ==

In 1980, Itautec established its first online presence as GRI Gerenciador de Redes Itautec, known as the "Itautec Network Services Provider," along with Banktec mainframes. The following year, in 1981, the central agency of Itaú was founded, featuring an automation system developed by Itautec. By 1982, the Bank of Brazil had implemented GRI and Banktec systems.
Itautec introduced the PC/XT microcomputer in 1985, entering the personal computing market. In 1986, Itautec installed its first compact Automated teller machine(ATM). In 1989, Itautec introduced GRIP (Gerenciamento de Redes Itautec para PC), a network management system designed for PCs.
In 1990, Itautec released its first Notebook computer, the IS 386 Note. In 1994, the company launched a second-generation ATM in Brazil, followed by the introduction of the first version of Banktec Multicanal in Banco Itaú Argentina in 1995.
By 2001, Itautec began exporting ATMs to the United States and Europe. In 2002, the company acquired technology from NMD for DelaRue and installed the first WEB system in Banco Itaú Buen Ayre.
In 2009, Itautec ranked 24th in the Fintech ranking, which lists the world's largest IT providers. In 2011, Itautec introduced the world's first touchless 3D ATM.


== See also ==
SISNE plus


== Sources ==
American Banker article: "ATM's Hologram Interface Deters Theft"
Credit Union Journal article: "First Touchscreen 3D ATM Launched for CUMarket"


== References ==


== External links ==
Itautec home page