Jasmine Felicia Crockett (born March 29, 1981) is an American lawyer and politician serving as the U.S. representative for Texas's 30th congressional district since 2023. A member of the Democratic Party, she represented the 100th district in the Texas House of Representatives from 2021 to 2023.
Born and raised in Missouri, Crockett was a public defender for Bowie County, Texas, and later worked as personal injury lawyer before her entry into electoral politics. She was elected to the Texas House in 2020, succeeding Mayor Eric Johnson. In 2022, Crockett was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives, representing a majority-minority district based in Dallas. Among her assignments, in 2025, Crockett was seated on the Subcommittee on Oversight of the United States House Committee on the Judiciary.


== Early life and education ==
Crockett was born in St. Louis, Missouri, to parents Rev. Joseph and Gwen Crockett. She attended Mary Institute and St. Louis Country Day School and Rosati-Kain Academy, a private all-girls Catholic high school in St. Louis.
Attending Rhodes College, she was advised by a professor that she had too much personality to settle for her plan to become a certified public accountant. The school's handling of a series of hate crimes on campus inspired her to become a lawyer. When she got racist hate mail and her Black friends' cars were keyed she explained, "My school didn't know what to do, and they brought in The Cochran Firm, and the lawyer that helped me became my instant 'shero'. ... While we never figured out what happened, it was empowering to have her there. I saw how much help a lawyer could be to somebody at a very confusing time." She graduated in 2003 with a Bachelor of Arts in business administration.
She began law school at Thurgood Marshall School of Law at Texas Southern University before graduating from the University of Houston Law Center in 2006 with a Juris Doctor and soon passed the bar examination. She was a member of the National Bar Association and of the Dallas Black Criminal Bar Association.


== Early career ==
Following her education, Crockett became a public defender for Bowie County, Texas and later formed a law firm, which handled car accident lawsuits and took pro bono cases for Black Lives Matter activists.


=== Texas House of Representatives (2021–2023) ===
In 2019, after Eric Johnson vacated his seat in the Texas House to become mayor of Dallas, a special election was held on November 5 with a runoff on January 28, 2020, for the remainder of his term, which Lorraine Birabil won. Crockett challenged Birabil in the 2020 Democratic primary. She narrowly defeated Birabil in a primary runoff, advancing to the November 2020 general election, which she won unopposed. She assumed office in January 2021.


== U.S. House of Representatives (2023–present) ==


=== Elections ===


==== 2022 ====

On November 20, 2021, incumbent representative Eddie Bernice Johnson of Texas's 30th congressional district announced she would not seek reelection in 2022. Four days later, Crockett declared her candidacy for the seat. Johnson simultaneously announced that she was backing Crockett. Crockett also received extensive financial support from Super PACs aligned with the cryptocurrency industry, with Sam Bankman-Fried's Protect Our Future PAC giving $1 million in support of her campaign. In the Democratic primary election, Crockett and Jane Hope Hamilton, an aide to U.S. representative Marc Veasey, advanced to a runoff election, which Crockett won. She then won the general election on November 8.


=== Tenure ===
In a 2023 impeachment hearing for President Joe Biden, Crockett accused fellow congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene and other Republicans of hypocrisy. She claimed that those launching the impeachment inquiry, and those who brought forth charges against Biden, were ignoring documented evidence of President Donald Trump's own criminal offenses; she displayed photos from the FBI search of Mar-a-Lago, depicting Trump storing classified documents inside a bathroom (and in other locations lacking security), to which she remarked, "These are our national secrets—looks like in the shitter to me."
During the 118th Congress, Crockett served as the Democratic freshman class representative between the House Democratic leadership and the approximately 35 newly-elected Democratic members.
Crockett addressed the 2024 Democratic National Convention and referenced the incident. When comparing Democratic presidential nominee Kamala Harris to Trump, the Republican nominee, she said of the latter, "He keeps national secrets next to his thinking chair—y'all know what I said the other time." She won a second term to House of Representatives in 2024. She was a co-chair of the 2024 Harris–Walz campaign.
In March 2025, Crockett called Governor Greg Abbott, who is handicapped and uses a wheelchair, "Governor Hot Wheels" and a "Hot Ass Mess" at a speech onstage during Human Rights Campaign's annual dinner. Crockett denied that the comment had to do with Abbott's condition, instead saying that it referenced the "planes, trains, and automobiles" he used to transfer migrants to Democratic communities. In response, Abbott stated: "It's another day and another disaster by the Democrats." Representative Randy Weber filed a censure resolution against Crockett.
In June 2025, Crockett announced her candidacy for Ranking Member of the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform. She later withdrew from the race to become the Ranking Member after placing last in the House Democratic Steering and Policy Committee vote.


=== Caucus memberships ===
Black Maternal Health Caucus
Congressional Black Caucus
Congressional Equality Caucus
Congressional Progressive Caucus
Congressional Caucus for the Equal Rights Amendment
Congressional Ukraine Caucus


=== Committee assignments ===
Current
Committee on the Judiciary (2025–present)
Subcommittee on Oversight (Ranking Member)
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform (2023–present; Vice Ranking Member, 2025–present)
Subcommittee on Delivering on Government Efficiency (2025–present)
Subcommittee on Government Operations and the Federal Workforce (2023-2025)
Past
Committee on Agriculture (2023-2025)
Subcommittee on Commodity Markets, Digital Assets, and Rural Development
Subcommittee on General Farm Commodities, Risk Management, and Credit
Subcommittee on Nutrition, Foreign Agriculture, and Horticulture
Select Subcommittee on the Weaponization of the Federal Government (2023-2025)


== Policy positions ==
A member of the Congressional Progressive Caucus, Crockett has been labeled as a progressive Democrat. Crockett, however, has personally distanced herself from the label, calling her positions "common sense".


=== Gun rights ===
Crockett owns a firearm and is licensed to carry, though supports a ban on assault weapons, having stated "it’s the equivalent of some of these people having a cannon.... People literally have almost no chance of surviving when some of these weapons are used." She acknowledges that passage of an assault weapons ban in Texas is likely not politically achievable.


== Rhetorical style ==
Crockett has used alliteration in public speaking. In an Oversight Committee hearing on May 16, 2024, Crockett responded to the following barb by Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene: "I think your fake eyelashes are messing up what you're reading." Committee chairman James Comer ruled that this remark did not violate House protocol. To clarify the limits on personal comments, Crockett asked "If someone on this committee then starts talking about somebody's bleach-blonde, bad-built, butch body, that would not be engaging in personalities, correct?" Comer responded with "... a what, now?" On August 19, 2024, the first night of the 2024 Democratic National Convention, Crockett spoke about Republican nominee Donald Trump, and asked, "will a vindictive vile villain violate voters' vision?"


== Social media ==
Jasmine Crockett has had a major social media presence and has accounts on TikTok, Instagram, Facebook, Youtube and X.  
Her most viral TikTok with 9.9 million views as of November 2025 is about the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and her attempt to get Republicans to say so.
On Instagram her most viewed reel is about Kash Patel's lack of qualifications to be director of the FBI, with 13.2 million views and over 1 million likes as of November 2025.
On Facebook she has 724K followers.


== Electoral history ==


== Personal life ==
Crockett is a Baptist and a member of Delta Sigma Theta sorority.


== See also ==
List of African-American United States representatives
Women in the United States House of Representatives


== References ==


== External links ==

Congresswoman Jasmine Crockett official U.S. House website
Jasmine Crockett for Congress campaign website
Appearances on C-SPAN
Jasmine Crockett at IMDb
Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress
Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission
Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
Profile at Vote Smart