The following lists achievements and distinctions of various presidents of the United States. It includes distinctions achieved in their earlier life and post-presidencies. Due to some confusion surrounding sovereignty of nations during presidential visits, only nations that were independent, sovereign, or recognized by the United States during the presidency are listed here as a precedent.


== George Washington (1789–1797) ==

First president of the United States
First president to have been born in the 18th century
First president to have been a military veteran
First president to have served in the American Revolutionary War
First president born in Virginia
First president to be elected to a second term in office
First president to own slaves
First president to be an Episcopalian
First president to be a Freemason
First president to appear on a postage stamp
First president to receive votes from every presidential elector in an election
First president to be inaugurated in New York City
First president to fill the entire body of the United States federal judges; including the United States Supreme Court
First president to deliver a State of the Union address (1790)
First president to have a first lady older in age
First president to command a standing field army while in office (during the Whiskey Rebellion)
First president who was not affiliated with any political party
First president to go uncontested in an election
First president to not have any biological children
First president to be declared an honorary citizen of a foreign country, and an honorary citizen of France
First president to deliver a farewell address
First president to have a constitutional amendment passed during his tenure (the first 11 amendments were passed during his two terms)


== John Adams (1797–1801) ==

First president born in Massachusetts[3]
First president to live in the White House
First president to have previously served as vice president
First president to have previously served as an ambassador to a foreign country
First president to be a lawyer
First president who had never served in the military
First president to not be a slave owner
First president to wear a powdered wig tied in a queue in the fashion of the 18th century
First president to receive more than 45% of the electoral vote while running for re-election, without being re-elected
First president who attended one of the Ivy League colleges
First president to have biological children
First president to receive the oath of office from a chief justice of the Supreme Court
First president not to veto any bills while in office
First president to have a child (Charles Adams) die while in office
First president to be defeated for a second term in office
First president to not attend the inauguration of his successor
First president to have a first lady younger in age
First president to have a child (John Quincy Adams) serve as president of the United States
First president to live to the age of 90.
First president to have signed the Declaration of Independence
First president to have visited Europe
First president to meet a reigning British monarch
First president to outlive another former president
First president to be multilingual
First president to not have any constitutional amendment be ratified during his term


== Thomas Jefferson (1801–1809) ==

First president to have previously been a governor
First president to have previously served as secretary of state
First president to have been widowed prior to his inauguration
First president to be inaugurated in Washington, D.C.
First president to have his inaugural speech reprinted in a newspaper
First president whose inauguration was not attended by his immediate predecessor
First president to live a full presidential term in the White House
First president to defeat an opponent he had previously lost to in a presidential election
First president who defeated an incumbent president
First president whose election was decided in the United States House of Representatives
First president to have an inaugural parade; occurred during his second inauguration
First president to cite the doctrine of executive privilege
First president to have a vice president elected under the Twelfth Amendment
First president to have two different vice presidents
First president to expand the country's territory
First president to have pets at the White House; two grizzly bear cubs and a mockingbird
First president to found a university after being in office; the University of Virginia in 1819
First president to serve as rector of a university (University of Virginia)
First president to deliver a State of the Union address via writing; this practice continued until 1913.
First president to die on the Fourth of July
First president to be outlived by another former president
First president to father children while in office


== James Madison (1809–1817) ==

First president to have served in the United States House of Representatives
First president to ask Congress for a declaration of war
First president to serve as a wartime commander-in-chief
First president to have an inaugural ball
First president to issue a pocket veto
First president to have a parent live throughout his presidency
First president to have a second cousin as a future president (Zachary Taylor)
First president to host a wedding in the White House
First president to have a vice president die in office and the first president to have a vacancy in the office of vice president


== James Monroe (1817–1825) ==

First president to have served in the United States Senate
First president to have a child marry at the White House
First president to ride on a steamboat
First president to have held over 50 years of elected public office positions by the end of his presidency
First president to have held two cabinet positions at once prior to assuming office
First president to have a foreign capital named after him (Monrovia, Liberia)


== John Quincy Adams (1825–1829) ==

First president to be the son of another president
First president whose father lived to see him become president
First president to have a foreign-born spouse
First president to have a son marry at the White House
First president to have a surviving photograph of him
First president elected despite receiving fewer votes than his opponent
First president to not win a majority of electoral votes
First president to adopt a short haircut instead of long hair tied in a queue
First president to have been inaugurated wearing long trousers instead of knee breeches
First president to serve in Congress after serving in the presidency
First president to die from a stroke
First president to have been nominated to the Supreme Court
First president to have any facial hair
First president to have a foreign-born child
First president who was not a Founding Father


== Andrew Jackson (1829–1837) ==

First president born in a log cabin
First president born to immigrant parents
First president to be inaugurated on the East Portico of the United States Capitol, facing the Library of Congress and Supreme Court
First president to pay off the entire national debt
First president born after the death of his father
First president elected as a Democrat to the presidency
First president to marry a divorced woman
First president to kill someone in a duel
First president to survive an assassination attempt while in office
First president born in the Carolinas
First president to ride on a railroad train
First president to be censured by the Senate, although it was expunged in 1837
First president to have previously administered the oath of office to a vice president of the United States (John C. Calhoun)
First president to die outside of the original British Thirteen Colonies.


== Martin Van Buren (1837–1841) ==

First president born after the Declaration of Independence
First president to be a non-native speaker of English
First president not of British ancestry
First president to have Dutch ancestry
First president from the state of New York
First president to be born a citizen of the United States and not a British subject
First president to have multiple members of the same party (Whig) run against him
First president to receive over 1 million votes in an election while in office
First president from the Northern United States to have owned a slave
First president to run for presidency on a third-party ticket
First president to run for a second nonconsecutive term


== William Henry Harrison (1841) ==

First president elected as a Whig to the presidency
First president to have 10 or more biological children
First president to be a grandfather of a future president
First president to give an inaugural address of more than 5,000 words
First president to not issue an executive order
First president to die in office
First president to die in the White House
First president to serve less than one full term in office
First president to receive over 1 million votes in a presidential election before assuming office
First president to have a photograph taken while in office


== John Tyler (1841–1845) ==

First president to ascend to the presidency by the death of his predecessor
First president to have a veto overridden
First president to face a vote of impeachment in the House (it was unsuccessful)
First president to be widowed while in office
First president to remarry while in office
First president to be born after the ratification of the United States Constitution
First president to be expelled from his political party while in office
First president to be buried under a foreign flag
First president to have links to the Confederate States of America
First president to never win a presidential election
First president to father children after leaving office


== James K. Polk (1845–1849) ==

First president to be under the age of 50 upon election and upon entering office
First president to have served as speaker of the House of Representatives
First president to be elected despite losing his states of birth and residence
First president to be nominated by his party as a dark horse
First president not to seek re-election upon the completion of his one term
First president to die before reaching the age of 60
First president to predecease a parent and a mother
First president not to keep a pet during his term in office
First president to have his cabinet photographed
First president to have a surviving photograph taken of him while in office


== Zachary Taylor (1849–1850) ==

First president who had served in no prior elected office
First president to serve in the Mexican–American War
First president to take office while his party held a minority of seats in the Senate
First president to win election with his party holding no majority in either chamber of Congress
First president to win a presidential election in November
First president to be awarded the Congressional Gold Medal more than once
First president to use the term "First Lady"
First president to be a second cousin of a previous president (James Madison)


== Millard Fillmore (1850–1853) ==

First president to establish a permanent White House library
First president born in the 1800s
First president to leave office while his father was alive
First president to install a kitchen stove in the White House
First president to formally have a direct communication with Japan


== Franklin Pierce (1853–1857) ==

First president born in New Hampshire
First president born in the 19th century
First president to install central heating in the White House
First president to deliver his inaugural address from memory
First president to affirm the oath of office rather than to swear it
First president who had been elected to actively seek reelection but be defeated for nomination for a second term by his party
First president to have a Christmas tree in the White House
First president to keep his original cabinet members for his entire four-year term
First president to have multiple vetoes overridden


== James Buchanan (1857–1861) ==

First president born in Pennsylvania
First president to serve in the military and not become an officer during their service
First president to defeat a sitting president of the same party at the nominating convention
First president to be a bachelor
First president to have never been married


== Abraham Lincoln (1861–1865) ==

First president born in Kentucky
First president born outside of the original 13 colonies
First president to hold a patent
First president to be assassinated
First president elected as a Republican to the presidency
First president to have a beard
First president born in the Southern United States who never owned slaves
First president to have pet cats


== Andrew Johnson (1865–1869) ==

First president to ascend to the presidency by the assassination of his predecessor
First president to be impeached by the House of Representatives
First president to have members of his own party vote for impeachment
First president to serve in the Senate after being president
First president to issue more than twenty vetoes
First president to have more than ten vetoes overridden


== Ulysses S. Grant (1869–1877) ==

First president born in Ohio
First president born after the War of 1812
First president to have both parents alive during his presidency
First president to appear with a moustache in office
First president to veto more than fifty bills
First president to visit Ireland, Egypt, China, and Japan (in 1878–1879, after leaving the presidency)
First president to publish his memoirs
First president to issue more than 40 pocket vetoes
First president to issue more than 100 executive orders
First president to attend a synagogue service while in office
First president to have served in the American Civil War
First president to host an Indian chief in the White House
First president to approve of and sign in a National Park
First president to set aside federal land for wildlife protection
First president to be placed under arrest while in office


== Rutherford B. Hayes (1877–1881) ==

First president to hold a state Thanksgiving dinner
First president to hold the White House Easter Egg Roll
First president to have a telephone installed in the White House
First president to have a typewriter installed in the White House
First president to visit the West Coast of the United States while in office
First president to win the electoral vote but lose the popular vote.
First president to be wounded in the American Civil War


== James A. Garfield (1881) ==

First president to be elected to the presidency directly from the House of Representatives
First president to be left-handed or ambidextrous
First president to die before reaching the age of 50
First president to have served as a university president
First president to deliver a campaign speech in a language other than English
First president who was a mathematician (he found a proof of the Pythagorean theorem).


== Chester A. Arthur (1881–1885) ==

First president born in Vermont
First president to take the oath of office in his own home
First president to have an elevator installed in the White House


== Grover Cleveland (1885–1889, 1893–1897) ==

First president born in New Jersey
First president to get married at the White House
First president to have a child born in the White House
First president to serve nonconsecutive terms
First president to be filmed
First president to veto more than 100 bills, with over 500, including over 200 pocket vetoes


== Benjamin Harrison (1889–1893) ==

First president to be the grandson of another president
First president to have a lighted Christmas tree at the White House
First president to have electric lighting installed in the White House
First president to have his voice recorded.
First president to create and designate a United States Prehistoric and Cultural Site
First president to be portrayed wearing a modern long tie.


== William McKinley (1897–1901) ==

First president to ride in an automobile
First president to campaign by telephone
First president to use a modern campaign button for an election


== Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909) ==

First president born in New York City
First president who ascended to the presidency upon the death of a predecessor, and later was elected to the presidency in his own right
First president (and first American) to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize
First president to ride in any sort of aircraft
First president to ride in a submarine
First president to travel outside the contiguous United States and to visit a foreign country while in office
First president to have his offices in the West Wing
First president to earn the Medal of Honor
First president to issue over 1000 executive orders
First president to call for global governance
First president to fully campaign for a third presidential term.
First president to be wounded in an assassination attempt while out of office
First president to designate a National Wildlife Refuge
First president to wear eyeglasses full time in office
First president to appoint a Jew (Oscar Straus) to a cabinet office
First president to be widowed and remarried prior to taking office
First president to be portrayed wearing a modern long tie while in office.


== William Howard Taft (1909–1913) ==

First president to throw out a ceremonial first pitch
First president to have weighed over 300 pounds
First president to own an automobile
First president to serve in the federal judiciary, having served on the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
First president to have been a former solicitor general
First president to preside over all of the 48 contiguous states
First president to visit Mexico while in office
First president to use the Oval Office
First president to serve on the Supreme Court
First president to serve in all three branches of the federal government
First president to be honorary president of the Boy Scouts of America
First president to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery. He was also the first member of the Supreme Court to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery upon his death in 1930.


== Woodrow Wilson (1913–1921) ==

First president to declare a national emergency
First president to have a PhD
First president to visit Europe while in office
First president to meet with the pope while in office
First president to meet with a reigning British monarch while in office
First president to hold a press conference or regular news briefings
First president to appoint a Jew (Louis Brandeis) to the Supreme Court
First president to attend a World Series game
First president to be buried in Washington, D.C.
First president to have the first lady perform presidential duties
First president to serve in office during a World War


== Warren G. Harding (1921–1923) ==

First president born after the Civil War
First president to have been a publisher
First president to have been a lieutenant governor
First president to be elected while being a sitting U.S. senator
First president to learn about his victory over the radio
First president to be elected on his birthday
First president elected after women gained the right to vote
First president to ride to and from his inauguration in a car
First president to appoint a former president (William Howard Taft) to the Supreme Court
First president to give his inaugural address over an amplified system
First president to own and install a radio in the White House
First president to learn to drive a car
First president to visit Canada while in office
First president to predecease his father
First president to be heard on a radio broadcast, over Navy radio station NOF in Anacostia, Washington, D.C.
First president to use the term "Founding Fathers"


== Calvin Coolidge (1923–1929) ==

First president to have the oath of office administered to him by a parent
First president born on the Fourth of July
First president to be sworn in by a former president
First president to give a radio broadcast from the White House
First president to visit Cuba while in office
First president to be a Congregationalist
First president to appear on U.S. coinage while alive and in office
First president to serve as both governor and lieutenant governor of a state
First president to be an honorary member of a Native American tribe


== Herbert Hoover (1929–1933) ==

First president born west of the Mississippi River and first born in Iowa
First president who was a Quaker
First president to have a telephone on his desk
First president to have a post-presidency of more than 30 years
First president to have a multiethnic and Native American vice president (Charles Curtis)
First president to outlive his entire cabinet
First president to be filmed in color
First president to have a Canadian parent
First president to have Swiss ancestry


== Franklin D. Roosevelt (1933–1945) ==

First president to be inaugurated on January 20 (per the Twentieth Amendment)
First president to appoint a woman (Frances Perkins) to a cabinet post
First president to appear five times on a national ticket, a record tied by Richard Nixon
First president to appear on television
First president to serve more than two terms
First president to win four terms in an election
First president to establish a presidential library
First president to veto more than 600 bills
First president to issue more than 250 pocket vetoes
First president to visit South America and Africa while in office
First president to fly in an airplane while in office
First president to make a transatlantic flight
First president to fly for state business in 1943
First president to visit the Soviet Union, Iran and Haiti
First president to establish the "First 100 Days" benchmark and tradition
First president to be named Time Person of the Year
First president to meet with a king of Saudi Arabia, Ibn Saud in 1945
First president to use a wheelchair
First president to have a child born in Canada


== Harry S. Truman  (1945–1953) ==

First president born in Missouri
First president to be assigned a Secret Service code name
First president to serve in World War I
First president to have a nationally televised inauguration
First president to leave office on January 20 (after the passage of the Twentieth Amendment)
First president and person to be issued a Medicare card
First president to have his Farewell Address broadcast from the Oval Office
First president to authorize the use of nuclear weapons against a foreign nation
First president to meet a Swedish prime minister (he met Tage Erlander in 1952)
First president to visit Germany


== Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961) ==

First president born in Texas
First president to serve in World War II
First president to serve in both World Wars
First president to preside over all fifty contemporary U.S. states
First president to begin his presidency on January 20 (per the Twentieth Amendment)
First president awarded the Order of Muhammad
First president to travel by jet aircraft and helicopter
First president and first American to be appointed to the British Order of Merit
First president to have a pilot's license
First president to give a televised news conference, in 1955
First president to appear on color television
First president to deliver an address from a communications satellite – the first message from space
First president to visit a mosque
First president to have received an honorary knighthood from a foreign nation (Eisenhower received 22 such honors)
First president to receive the Army Distinguished Service Medal, the Navy Distinguished Service Medal, and the Legion of Merit
First president to receive the Philippine Distinguished Service Star, the French Médaille militaire, the French Croix de Guerre 1939–1945, the Belgian Croix de guerre, and the Luxembourgish Military Medal.
First president to be made a Grand Cordon of the Japanese Order of the Chrysanthemum
First president and American to receive the Soviet Order of Victory, for serving as Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force
First president to receive an Emmy Award
First president to authorize a National Park in a United States territory: Virgin Islands National Park
First president to visit Switzerland, Turkey, Pakistan, Afghanistan, India, Greece, Spain, Portugal, Chile, South Korea, the Philippines, and Taiwan while in office
First president of Pennsylvania Dutch descent
First president to turn 70 in office.


== John F. Kennedy (1961–1963) ==

First president who was Catholic
First president born in the 20th century
First president to have been a Boy Scout
First president of entirely Irish descent
First president who had no ancestry from the American colonial period
First president to have previously served in the United States Navy
First president to receive the Purple Heart, awarded in 1943 after he was wounded in action aboard PT-109
First president (along with future president Richard Nixon) to participate in the first televised presidential debates
First president to win in a case of dueling electors without counsel
First president to be awarded a Pulitzer Prize
First president to have an inaugural poet; Robert Frost
First president to use the Situation Room
First president to visit Austria, Costa Rica, Venezuela, and Ireland while in office
First president to have both his parents outlive him
First president to have a grandparent outlive him
First president to receive the Navy and Marine Corps Medal, awarded for his heroism as commanding officer of the Motor Torpedo Boat PT-109 when the ship was rammed and sunk by the Japanese destroyer Amagiri in 1943
First president to ceremoniously grant a non-U.S. citizen honorary citizenship
First president to have an airport named after him


== Lyndon B. Johnson (1963–1969) ==

First president to have been party leader in the Senate, having been minority leader from 1953 to 1955 and majority leader from 1955 to 1961
First president to have served as Senate Majority Whip, having served in that office from 1951 to 1953
First president to be inaugurated on an airplane. His inauguration was held aboard Air Force One in 1963.
First president to be sworn in by a woman (Sarah T. Hughes)
First president to visit Australia, New Zealand, Vietnam, Thailand, Malaysia, Suriname, Honduras, Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Guatemala while in office.
First president to appoint an African American (Thurgood Marshall) to the Supreme Court.
First president to appoint an African American (Robert C. Weaver) to a cabinet post. Weaver was appointed the first United States secretary of housing and urban development in 1966.
First president to use the presidential call button
First president to receive the Silver Star


== Richard Nixon (1969–1974) ==

First president born in California
First president (along with past president John F. Kennedy) to have participated in the first presidential debates. He participated in four televised debates in 1960.
First non-incumbent vice president to be elected president
First president to attend an NFL game while in office
First president to travel on a regularly scheduled commercial flight while in office.
First president to visit the People's Republic of China, Indonesia, Romania, Yugoslavia, Israel, Poland, Iceland, Jordan, and Syria while in office.
First president to meet an emperor of Japan, having met Hirohito in 1971
First president to visit all 50 states
First president to resign from the presidency. The resignation of Nixon in 1974, was a result of the Watergate scandal. There were efforts by the House of Representatives to impeach the president for obstruction of justice, abuse of power, and contempt of Congress.
First president to be pardoned by another president (Gerald Ford) The pardon of Richard Nixon in 1974, gave Nixon a full and unconditional pardon for any crimes he might have committed against the United States while president.
First president to relinquish their Secret Service detail


== Gerald Ford (1974–1977) ==

First president born in Nebraska.
First president to be an Eagle Scout, and receive the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award
First president to serve as House Minority Leader, having served in that office from 1965 to 1973
First president to serve as Republican Conference Chairman of the House of Representatives
First president to ascend to the presidency by the resignation of his predecessor
First president to ascend to the presidency without being elected to either the offices of the president or vice president
First president to pardon another president (Richard Nixon). The pardon of Richard Nixon in 1974 gave Nixon a full and unconditional pardon for any crimes he might have committed against the United States while president.
First president to visit Japan and Finland while in office
First president to release a full report of his medical checkup to the public
First president to have Polish ancestry
First incumbent president to testify in a criminal trial (against Squeaky Fromme, who had attempted to assassinate him)


== Jimmy Carter (1977–1981) ==

First president born in Georgia
First president who was born in a hospital.
First president born after World War I.
First president to graduate from the United States Naval Academy; part of the class of 1947
First president to use a nickname (Jimmy) in an official capacity
First president to walk on Pennsylvania Avenue during the inauguration parade
First president to appoint a secretary of education (and first woman) (Shirley Hufstedler)
First president to visit Nigeria and Guadeloupe while in office.
First president to appoint a woman to be secretary of commerce (Juanita M. Kreps)
First president who completed at least one full term in office and never made a nomination to the Supreme Court
First president to have hosted an official papal visit at the White House. In 1979, Pope John Paul II became the first pontiff to visit a sitting president at the White House.
First president to address the Knesset.
First president to visit North Korea (post-office, on a diplomatic mission).
First president to attend a regular-season NFL game while in office
First president to become a centenarian
First president to have been married for over 75 years (Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter were married for 77 years, 135 days.)
First president to live to 40+ year post-presidency, Carter left the White House in 1981 and lived another 43 years after being president, until 2024.
First president to live to the year when his official White House Christmas ornament was unveiled


== Ronald Reagan (1981–1989) ==

First president born in Illinois.
First president to have been divorced. He married his first wife (Jane Wyman) in 1940, and the couple divorced in 1949.
First president to be the head of a union (the Screen Actors Guild).
First president to have been an actor.
First president to nominate a woman to the Supreme Court (Sandra Day O'Connor).
First president to be inaugurated at the West Front of the Capitol Building.
First president to be re-elected over the age of 70, as he was 73 years old when he was re-elected in 1984.
First president to attend a NASCAR race while in office.
First president to visit the New York Stock Exchange, (on March 28, 1985) while in office.
First president to attend and open an Olympic Games (the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles) while in office.
First president to address both houses of the British parliament. (on June 8, 1982)
First president to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
First president to win a Golden Globe Award.
First president to be wounded in an assassination attempt while in office and survive his injuries.
First president to visit an independent Jamaica, Barbados, and Grenada while in office
First president to visit the DMZ while in office.
First president to temporarily transfer power to the vice president, invoking the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution


== George H. W. Bush (1989–1993) ==

First president to have been a naval aviator
First president to have served as Ambassador to the United Nations (1971–1973)
First president to have served as the chief of the United States Liaison Office in China (1974–1975)
First president to have served as director of central intelligence (office is now the director of the Central Intelligence Agency) (January 1976 – January 1977)
First president to have served as the chairperson of the Republican National Committee (1973–1974)
First president to have served as acting president (when Reagan was sedated for eight hours due to colon surgery)
First president to have the first Hispanic and first woman Surgeon General (Antonia Novello, M.D.)
First president to visit Hungary, Malta, the Netherlands, Czechoslovakia, Singapore, Somalia, and the Russian Federation, as well as a reunified Germany while in office.
First president to have received a Distinguished Flying Cross
First president to formally pardon a turkey, officially sparking the Turkey Pardon Tradition
First president to have been married for over 70 years (George H. W. and Barbara Bush were married for 73 years, 101 days.)
First president to have lived at both Number One Observatory Circle and the White House
First president to have Swedish ancestry


== Bill Clinton (1993–2001) ==

First president born in Arkansas
First president born after World War II.
First president to be a baby boomer
First president to be a Rhodes Scholar
First president whose inauguration was streamed on the Internet
First president with an official White House website
First president to nominate a woman for White House press secretary (Dee Dee Myers) 
First president to nominate a woman for secretary of state (Madeleine Albright)
First president to nominate a woman for United States attorney general (Janet Reno)
First president to appoint a Jewish woman (Ruth Bader Ginsburg) to the Supreme Court
First president to nominate an openly gay ambassador (James C. Hormel).
First president to address the Human Rights Campaign.
First president to attend and open the FIFA World Cup while in office (1994).
First president to address the AIPAC while in office.
First president to host and perform in a jazz festival while in office.
First president to attend the US Open while in office.
First president to visit Ukraine, Belarus, Latvia, Kuwait, the Czech Republic, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Denmark, Ghana, Uganda, Rwanda, post-apartheid South Africa, Botswana, Senegal, Slovenia, Macedonia, Norway, Bulgaria, Kosovo, Bangladesh, Oman, Tanzania, Brunei, as well as reunited Vietnam while in office
First president to visit Northern Ireland while in office.
First president to visit and address the Palestinian National Authority while in office
First president to visit Panmunjom and the Bridge of no return.
First president to send an email
First president to appoint an Asian American to a cabinet post (Norman Mineta)
First president to establish GPS modernization
First president to attend the World Economic Forum while in office.
First president to be married to a member of Congress


== George W. Bush (2001–2009) ==

First president born in Connecticut
First president to have an MBA
First president to have completed a marathon.
First president whose election victory was decided by the Supreme Court (Bush v. Gore)
First president to have a State of the Union live broadcast on the Internet.
First president to nominate an African American for secretary of state (Colin Powell)
First president to nominate an African American woman for secretary of state (Condoleezza Rice)
First president to deliver a radio address in Spanish (The weekly radio address on Cinco de Mayo in 2001 was delivered both in English and Spanish.)
First president to have a 90% approval rating in the history of modern political polling
First president to attend the Daytona 500 while in office (2004).
First president to attend a Papal funeral while in office (death and funeral of Pope John Paul II)
First president to open the Winter Olympic Games (the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City) while in office
First president to deliver a State of the Union Address presided over by a female Speaker of the United States House of Representatives (Nancy Pelosi during the 2007 State of the Union Address).
First president to attend the Olympic Games in a foreign country (the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing) while in office
First president to leave office with both parents still alive
First president to celebrate Diwali
First president to visit Sweden, Lithuania, Qatar, Iraq, Slovakia, Georgia, Mongolia, Estonia, Albania, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, and Benin while in office
First president to eulogize a former president who was also his father


== Barack Obama (2009–2017) ==

First president born outside of the 48 contiguous states
First president born in Hawaii
First president to be multiethnic; his European-American mother was from Kansas and his African father was from Kenya.
First African American president
First president to have served as president of the Harvard Law Review.
First president to speak Indonesian (President Obama was able to converse in Indonesian when living in Jakarta from 1967 to 1971).
First president to have a Catholic vice president (Joe Biden)
First president to appoint a former first lady to the cabinet (Hillary Clinton as secretary of state).
First president to publicly endorse same-sex marriage
First president to nominate a woman for chair of the Federal Reserve (Janet Yellen)
First president to appoint a Latino American to the Supreme Court (Sonia Sotomayor)
First president to visit a federal prison
First president to receive the Israeli Presidential Medal of Honour.
First president to have his official photograph portrait taken with a digital camera.
First president to light a diya for Diwali at the White House
First president to address the African Union while in office
First president to have visited the Arctic Circle while in office
First president to visit Hiroshima, Japan, the location where the U.S. dropped the first atomic bomb used in warfare in 1945
First president to write a scholarly article in a scholarly journal while president
First president to visit an independent Trinidad and Tobago, Cambodia, Myanmar, Kenya, Ethiopia, and Laos while in office
First president to visit Wales while in office.
First president to attend Hannover Messe while in office.
First president to make his presidential library digital, as opposed to a physical facility.
First president to appear on a podcast while in office


== Donald Trump (2017–2021, 2025–present) ==

First president to assume the office without having had any prior public service experience, military or political
First president to be a resident of Florida
First president to launch their own cryptocurrency ($Trump)
First president to own a social media platform (Truth Social)
First president presumed to be a billionaire prior to assuming office
First president to have a personal YouTube channel and reach 1 million subscribers
First president to have been divorced more than once. He married his first wife Ivana Trump in 1977 and divorced in 1992, married his second wife Marla Maples in 1993 and divorced in 1999.
First president to have children from three different wives
First president to have an Orthodox Jewish rabbi (Marvin Hier) give a benediction at his inauguration
First president to begin tenure with a net negative approval rating in the history of modern political polling
First president to visit the Western Wall while in office
First president to attend the March for Life rally while in office
First president to meet with two emperors of Japan while in office (Akihito and Naruhito)
First president to meet with the supreme leader of North Korea while in office (President Trump met Kim Jong Un during the 2018 North Korea–United States Singapore Summit).
First president to cross over the DMZ and enter North Korea while in office (2019 Koreas–United States DMZ Summit)
First president to be impeached twice by the House of Representatives (in 2019 and in 2021)
First president to have a Senate impeachment trial after his presidency (February 2021)
First president to run for reelection (2020) and to be reelected after being impeached (2024)
First president to be permanently banned from a social media platform (Twitter); however, the ban was lifted after a change in ownership.
First president to send a presidential text alert (in this case as a test) through the National Wireless Emergency Alert System
First president to directly oversee private spaceflight in the United States
First president to not personally hand over the nuclear football to his successor since its inception.
First president to be elected as a candidate from Florida (President Trump moved his residence from New York to Florida in 2019 and was elected as the first Floridian to become president in 2024).
First president to invite foreign heads of state or government to an inauguration (Among others, Javier Milei, Viktor Orbán, and Giorgia Meloni were invited to his second inauguration.)
First president to write an Oval Office letter to and receive one from their successor and predecessor who were the same person (Joe Biden)
First president to use the phrase "manifest destiny" during an inaugural address.
First president to attend the Super Bowl while in office (Super Bowl LIX)
First president to remove their predecessor's appointed board members at the Kennedy Center, as well as the first president to be elected chairman of the center
First president to have two official state visits to the United Kingdom. (2019, 2025)
First president to declare English as the official language of the U.S. (Executive Order 14224)
First president to pardon a corporation. (Paul Weiss)
First president to attend a UFC competition while in office.
First president to visit the Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque while in office.
First president to invite his first lady to co-sign legislation (TAKE IT DOWN Act)
First president to invoke Section 740 of the Home Rule Act of 1973 and federalize the Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia.
First president to have a presidential library being built at a public college (Miami Dade College).
First president to dismiss an appointed member of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors (President Trump dismissed Lisa Cook on August 25, 2025).
First president to attend the Ryder Cup while in office.
First president to be awarded the Grand Order of Mugunghwa.
First president to host the C5+1 format at the White House.
First president to host the President of Syria at the White House (President Trump hosted President Al-Sharaa on November 10, 2025).
First president to be awarded the FIFA Peace Prize.


=== Campaign ===

First president to be elected after his 70th birthday.
First president to be re-elected over the age of 75, as he was 78 years old when he was re-elected in 2024.
First person to win the presidency by defeating a female nominee for president (Hillary Clinton nominated by the Democrats).
First president to have a female campaign manager (Kellyanne Conway, 2016) as well as to have two different ones (Susie Wiles, 2024)
First president to attend and speak at the Libertarian National Convention (2024) and the first to have spoken at a convention for an opposing political party
First former president to participate in a televised presidential debate against an incumbent president (Joe Biden, June 2024).
First former president to participate in a televised presidential debate against an incumbent vice president (Kamala Harris, September 2024).


=== Prosecutions ===

First president to be indicted by a grand jury in a state case (March 2023).
First president to be indicted by a grand jury in a federal case (June 2023).
First president to be indicted by a grand jury in a federal case for actions taken while in office (August 2023).
First president to stand trial for state criminal charges (April 2024).
First president to be found guilty of committing felony offenses (May 2024; falsifying business records).
First president to be sentenced for a felony offense (January 2025; unconditional discharge).
First president to have a police booking photograph taken of them (August 2023), as well as display said photograph in the White House (January 2025).


=== Cabinet ===

First president to appoint an Indian American to a cabinet-level position (Nikki Haley, as ambassador to the United Nations, 2017)
First president to appoint an openly gay person to serve in an acting cabinet-level position (Richard Grenell, as director of national intelligence, 2020)
First president to appoint an openly gay person as secretary of the treasury (Scott Bessent, 2025).
First president to appoint a female White House chief of staff (Susie Wiles, 2025)
First president to appoint a Latino American as secretary of state (Marco Rubio, 2025)
First president to appoint a Pacific Islander American and Hindu to a cabinet-level position (Tulsi Gabbard, as director of national intelligence, 2025)
First president to have a vice president cast a tie breaking vote for a cabinet nominee (Betsy DeVos, as secretary of education, 2017)
First president to have a separate vice president cast a tie breaking vote for a cabinet nominee (Pete Hegseth, as secretary of defense, 2025)


=== Other appointments ===
First president to appoint a Hasidic Jew to an U.S. administration position requiring Senate confirmation (Mitchell Silk, 2020)
First president to appoint an Indian American and Hindu as director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (Kash Patel, 2025)


== Joe Biden (2021–2025) ==

First president to hold the office over the age of 78 and then turn 80 while in office.
First president to be a member of the Silent Generation
First president to have served as a senator for over 35 years
First president to receive the Presidential Medal of Freedom prior to taking office
First president to have a sign language interpreter participate in White House press briefings daily 
First president to formally recognize the Armenian genocide
First president to formally recognize Indigenous Peoples' Day
First president to win over 80 million votes in an election (in 2020)
First president to attend the Maccabiah Games
First president to meet with two British monarchs while in office (Queen Elizabeth II and King Charles III)
First president to travel to an active conflict zone not controlled by the United States military (Ukraine)
First president to join a picket line while in office
First president to bring a rescue dog to the White House (Major)
First president to have one of his children convicted in a criminal trial while in office
First president to participate in a televised debate against a former president (Donald Trump) and first to do so while in office
First president to be subject to the presidential immunity doctrine established in Trump v. United States (2024)
First president to suspend their reelection campaign after winning their party's primary
First president to visit the Amazon rainforest while in office
First president to visit Cape Verde and Angola while in office
First president to grant a pardon to his child
First president to become a great-grandfather while in office
First president to write an Oval Office letter to and receive one from their successor and predecessor who were both the same person (Donald Trump)


=== Cabinet ===

First president to serve with a female, Black, Asian American, Indian American, and Tamil American vice president (Kamala Harris)
First president to appoint an openly gay person confirmed by the Senate to serve in a cabinet position (Pete Buttigieg, as secretary of transportation)
First president to appoint a Native American as a cabinet secretary (Deb Haaland, as secretary of the interior)
First president to appoint an African American as secretary of defense (Lloyd Austin)
First president to appoint a Latino American as secretary of health and human services (Xavier Becerra)
First president to appoint a female director of national intelligence (Avril Haines)
First president to appoint a Latino American as secretary of homeland security (Alejandro Mayorkas)
First president to appoint a female secretary of the treasury (Janet Yellen)


=== Other appointments ===
First president to appoint an openly transgender federal official confirmed by the Senate (Rachel Levine, as Assistant Secretary for Health)
First president to appoint an African American woman to the Federal Reserve Board of Governors (Lisa Cook).
First president to appoint an African American and openly gay female White House press secretary (Karine Jean-Pierre)
First president to have the National Security Council include an official dedicated to climate change (John Kerry, as special presidential envoy for climate)
First president to have a national climate advisor (Gina McCarthy)
First president to appoint an African American to lead the United States Environmental Protection Agency (Michael S. Regan)
First president to appoint a Muslim American as an Article III judge (Zahid Quraishi)
First president to appoint a female and Asian American United States trade representative (Katherine Tai)
First president to appoint a Black woman and former federal public defender to the Supreme Court (Ketanji Brown Jackson)


== See also ==
List of First Lady of the United States firsts


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Sources ==
Brands, Henry William (1997), TR: The Last Romantic (full biography), New York: Basic Books, ISBN 978-0-465-06958-3, OCLC 36954615.
Hardesty, Von. Air Force One: The Aircraft that Shaped the Modern Presidency. Chanhassen, Minnesota: Northword Press, 2003. ISBN 1-55971-894-3.
Leech, Margaret (1959). In the Days of McKinley. New York: Harper and Brothers. pp. 594–600. OCLC 456809.
Miller, Nathan (1992). Theodore Roosevelt: A Life. William Morrow & Co. ISBN 9780688067847..
Pringle, Henry F. (1998) [First published 1939]. The Life and Times of William Howard Taft: A Biography. Vol. 1 (2008 reprint ed.). Newtown, CT: American Political Biography Press. ISBN 978-0-945707-20-2.
Pringle, Henry F. (1998) [First published 1939]. The Life and Times of William Howard Taft: A Biography. Vol. 2 (2008 reprint ed.). Newtown, CT: American Political Biography Press. ISBN 978-0-945707-19-6.
Estin, Blake; George Magazine (1998). The Book of Political Lists. Villard. ISBN 978-0-375750-11-3.


== External links ==
Presidential Firsts
Inaugural Firsts Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine
List of Presidential birthplaces, libraries, museums and graves Archived January 23, 2009, at the Wayback Machine