This is a list of known humanitarian aid, that has and will be provided to Ukraine during the Russo-Ukrainian War. This list does not include financial support to the Ukrainian government unless earmarked for humanitarian purposes.


== Sources ==


=== Sovereign countries ===


=== European Union ===

Individual EU member states have provided aid since 2014. The following list is the aid collectively provided by the EU. Most of this aid has been coordinated by the European Commission.

€500 million in humanitarian aid, announced on 1 March 2022.
In March 2022, a total of 10,000 free beds from hospitals in the EU were "reserved" for Ukrainians and the first war casualties from Ukraine were transported to various hospitals in the union.
At least 1000 Ukrainian civilians evacuated for medical treatment in hospitals across the union so far.
At least 5 million Ukrainian refugee civilians housed in the EU through a Temporary Protection Directive.
5.5 million Potassium Iodide tablets provided to Ukraine though the EU Emergency Response Coordination Centre.
500 electrical generators provided to Ukraine via the EU Civil Protection Mechanism on 27 June 2023.
An additional €110 million worth of humanitarian aid pledged to Ukraine and Ukrainians displaced in Moldova as well as 84 generators on 14 November 2023.
Over 3,000 Ukrainian patients transferred to hospitals in EU nations for specialist care.
€83 million funding towards humanitarian projects helping Ukrainian civilians in Ukraine and Moldova.
157 generators donated by Austria, Germany, Sweden and the Netherlands via the EU Civil Protection Mechanism along with 10 large 1MW generators from rescEU stockpiles.
€5 million investment grant from the Eastern Europe Energy Efficiency and Environment Partnership for Ukrainian hospitals.
IT equipment to war crime prosecutors in Donetsk, Luhansk, Kharkiv and the Prosecutor General of Ukraine.
€180,900 of forensics equipment to the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine.
5,876 solar panels provided by the European Commission to Ukrainian hospitals.
€100 million grant to Ukrenergo from European Commission to support the reconstruction and restoration of Ukraine's energy grid announced 18 June 2024.
Approximately €2 million of IT equipment to Ukraine's Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food and the State Service on Food Safety and Consumer Protection.
68 generators provided to sustain critical infrastructure in Ukraine July 2024.
€2 million in funding allocated for a Mines Advisory Group and APOPO demining initiative in Ukraine.
€35 million towards humanitarian projects in Ukraine and €5 million to projects for Ukrainian refugees in Moldova announced 6 September 2024.
Five Peugeot Traveller vans donated to the State Emergency Service of Ukraine October 2024 by the EU and UNDP.
€26.4 million allocated for the UNHRC's winter aid programme for Ukraine announced December 2024.
€15 million towards small NGOs in Ukraine and €10 million to support civil society work on EU integration.
Two specialised vehicles for mobile social services units on Chernivtsi Oblast provided by the EU and UNDP.
€1.7 million additional funding for the International Chernobyl Cooperation Account
€52 million allocated for four Ukrainian transport infrastructure projects announced December 2024.
€16.5 million in funding to renew urban public transport in Kyiv, Mykolaiv, Ivano-Frankivsk, and Odesa by the European Investment bank December 2024.
€140 aid package allocated for humanitarian projects in Ukraine announced January 2025 as well as €8 million allocated for Ukrainian refugees and host communities Moldova.
600 laptops donated to teachers in Ukraine's Donbass by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
€398,000 worth of equipment provided to State Emergency Service of Ukraine in cooperation with the UNDP.
Five transport and palliative care vehicles to Ukrainian communities in cooperation with the UNDP.
€300,000 worth of equipment provided to State Customs Service of Ukraine.
€116.6 million funding for independent Ukrainian media since 2017.
16 ambulances valued at €850,000 donated to Chernihiv, Sumy, Kharkiv, Mykolaiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Zaporizhzhia, Kherson, and Donetsk oblasts March 2025 in cooperation with the UNDP.
Two cogeneration units provided to Zaporizhzhia Oblast to improve the reliable supply of heat and power to homes and infrastructure by the EU and UNDP.
€19.6 billion in grants and loans provided to Ukraine by the EU Ukraine facility to improve economic stability, reform and reconstruction by April 2025.
Four specialised medical vehicles provided to Chernihiv Oblast by the EU and UNDP April 2025.
€166.2 million in funding to support UNHCR's humanitarian response in Ukraine between 2022-2025.
€32.2 million finding for the UNHCR aid for Ukrainian refugees in Moldova.
€48.8 million additional funding for UNHCR activities in Ukraine between July 2025 and December 2026.
A motorboat, trailer and diving equipment with a total value of €140,000 donated to the State Emergency Services through the UNDP.
€30 million allocated for reconstructing the reconstruction of the water supply system in Kryvyi Rih.
€13 million funding for The Energy Efficiency Fund for Ukraine June 2025.
€25 million funding for the EBRD Chornobyl Fund to help repair the New safe confinement.
€40 million funding allocated for humanitarian assistance for Ukrainian civilians through winter announced September 2025.
€14.7 million funding for UNWFP activities in Ukraine.
€46.2 funding to maintain and restore local infrastructure by the EIB October 2025.


=== Companies ===

More than 100 companies have taken actions in support of Ukraine, including boycotts, in February and March 2022.


=== Other parties ===
UK charity Pickups for Peace donated more than 300 4x4 vehicles filled with humanitarian aid to Ukraine.

Citizens of Japan donated $35 million.
Rakuten founder Hiroshi Mikitani pledged to donate ¥1 billion ($8.7 million) to humanitarian victims in Ukraine on 27 February.
Citizens of Taiwan donated $945 million NTD (US$33 million) as of 2 April 2022.
Citizens of South Korea donated $3 million directly to the Ukrainian Embassy in Seoul.
Numerous Korean celebrities have donated to Ukraine. Lee Young-ae and Han Ji-min each donated ₩100 million (approx. $87,000). Others including Narsha, Yang Dong-geun, U-KISS, Im Si-wan, Kim Eun-hee, Jang Hang-jun, etc. as well as Korean politicians also donated varying sums.
KOMCA (Korea Music Copyright Association) donated ₩70 million (approx. $61,000) to assist Ukrainian musicians and artists who have become refugees, as well as those artists who have had to stay in Ukraine to fight and are now forced to witness the destruction of Ukrainian cultural heritage caused by the Russian invasion.
Other charities and NGOs such as Come Back Alive, the Hope Bridge Korea Disaster Relief Association, the Seoul-based Good Neighbors International, UNICEF, Save the Children, etc., have also received significant donations from Korean citizens.
Citizens globally have provided ₴11.6 billion to special NBU multi-currency fundraising accounts and over $21 million in cryptocurrency, as of 1 March 2022.
United Hatzalah of Israel sent a team of 55 medical personnel, doctors, paramedics, and EMTs, on a rotation basis, to assist Ukrainian refugees in Moldova by providing free medical treatment and humanitarian aid to refugees. The EMS organization then began using its Ukrainian based volunteers, as well as those from Israel, to deliver food and medical supplies to hospitals and medical clinics inside Ukraine, while extricating injured and ill people out of Ukraine to receive care in other countries. They airlifted 3,000 Ukrainian refugees to Israel in an operation codenamed Operation Orange Wings.
Additionally, 40 doctors and paramedics from United Hatzalah of Israel, with medical and humanitarian equipment, went to the Moldova–Ukraine border to assist refugees.
Many Airbnb users across the globe have booked thousands of apartments in Ukraine, though they have no intention to visit the country.
Bunq CEO Ali Niknam created a foundation to support Ukrainian refugees in getting to the Netherlands under a highly skilled migrant visa.
In the United Kingdom, the Disasters Emergency Committee, an umbrella group of 15 British charities, launched a public appeal for humanitarian aid to Ukraine on 4 March 2022. It raised £55 million ($72.5 million) the first day, including personal donations from the British royal family. By 17 March, £200 million had been raised. A televised fundraising concert for the appeal on 29 March called Concert for Ukraine raised a further £13.4 million within 24 hours.
In Germany, €752 million have been donated (as of End of April 2022) according to a survey by the "German Center for Social Affairs" ("DZI") among 67 aid groups including the three fundraising campaigns Aktion Deutschland Hilft, "Bündnis Entwicklung Hilft" and "Aktionsbündnis Katastrophenhilfe".
Netflix co-founder Reed Hastings announced a $1 million donation to Razom, a Ukrainian NGO.
In March 2022, a donation-financed airlift called Ukraine Air Rescue was established under the umbrella of the non-profit German organization European Danube Academy ("Europäische Donau-Akademie"), with more than 100 pilots participating, delivering medical supplies to the Polish-Ukrainian border.
Citizens of Finland donated nearly €60 million to fundraising campaigns organized by the Finnish Red Cross, Finnish Committee for UNICEF, and Finn Church Aid by 19 May 2022.
In addition to private donations, numerous American states and local law enforcement agencies are donating surplus protective equipment through the Ukrainian American Coordinating Council and other organizations.
As of 10 April 2022, Dutch people had donated €160.8 million for Ukraine via a fundraising campaign called Giro 555 with one fire brigade donating seven fire trucks on 30 April.
The Serbian Orthodox Church decided to send all the donations collected in the churches to the Ukrainian Orthodox Church Citizens of Novi Sad donated clothes, food, blankets, adult diapers The National Council of the Ukrainian national minority in Serbia initiated an action to collect aid for the war-endangered people of Ukraine, and the action is being carried out in several places in Vojvodina. The Red Cross of Serbia opened a dedicated account to which Serbian citizens can donate to help the endangered population of Ukraine. Serbian Chamber of Commerce asked companies from Serbia to help Ukraine. Companies that responded include MK Group, Nestlé Adriatic, Elixir Group, Tobacco Industry Senta, Coca-Cola HBC – Srbija, and Bambi.
"Blue/Yellow" charity in Lithuania, dedicated for supporting Ukraine, collected over €22.9 million (as of 30 March) from the citizens of Lithuania.
On 30 May 2022 Lithuanian citizens raised €5 million for the crowdfunded purchase of a Bayraktar TB2 armed UAV for the Ukrainian military, the drone was subsequently given to Lithuania by Baykar Tech free of charge, with the €6 million collected used for aid. It reached Ukraine on 8 July 2022.
Lithuanian civilians also crowdfunded 7 Estonian-made EOS C VTOl reconnaissance drones (two of which were crowdfunded in early May, with the other five being later purchased with the money collected from the TB2 crowdfunder), 110 Lithuanian-made EDM4S Sky Wiper anti drone weapons, 37 WB Electronics Warmates (including launch/control equipment and ammunition), and 18 UJ-23 Topazs for the Ukrainian military.
On 21 June 2022 Russian journalist Dmitry Muratov auctioned off his Nobel Prize medal for $103.5 million to be donated to UNICEF's Humanitarian Response for Ukrainian Children Displaced by War.
11 August 2022, various fire departments in and around the San Francisco Bay area donated enough fire fighting equipment to fill a forty-foot shipping container to be shipped to Poland and then distributed in Ukraine.
$1.2 million was raised for the Ukraine Crisis Relief Fund by the US Open Tennis Plays for Peace exhibition.
30 power generators were donated by a Portuguese football club Benfica
Ukrainian football club FC Shakhtar Donetsk sent 20 power generators to the City of Power organization in Kherson and 10 power generators for a modular city of the Ukrainian Friends Foundation in Lviv.
214 kilograms of medicines were donated by Argentine medical companies
500 tonnes of humanitarian aid was donated by the Croatian DOBRO DOBRIM DoDo Association, for refugees in Croatia
The Argentine National Institute of Yerba Mate donated 128,000 bags of cooked mate for Ukrainian refugees in Poland
The city of Buenos Aires sent a humanitarian aid package to Ukraine.
The city of Vienna sent 15 tonnes of relief supplies to the cities of Kyiv and Odesa.
Austrian citizens sent €124 million via private donations to Ukraine.
A Belgian association sent 33 tons of medical equipment (March 2023).
The mayor of Brussels Philippe Close donated two ambulances to the city of Kyiv (May 2022) and an additional two ambulances one year later (May 2023).
21 million pesos was donated through a solidarity campaign organized by the Chilean Red Cross (April 2022).
£81,400 was donated by Caritas Chile for food, water, hygiene and medicine (June 2022).
Four fire engines were donated by the city of Leipzig on 27 March 2023.
Hungarian Maltese Relief Service delivered 570 tons of goods worth 1,5 million euros to Ukraine.
326 tons were donated by Hungarian citizens to the Hungarian Red Cross.
US$7–8 million worth of medicines were donated by Indian pharmaceutical companies as on 3 June 2022.
11 Mercedes-Benz buses were donated by the Riga municipality-owned Rīgas Satiksme to Kyiv filled with medicine, bandages and other medical materials prepared by Riga 1st Hospital along with other donations from the public on 26 April 2022.
15,400 atropine ampoules funded by Lithuanian citizens were sent on 8 April 2022.
The Estonian Lions Region sent 13 electric generators to Ukraine.
The Western Tallinn Central Hospital sent 140 hospital beds to Ukraine March 2023
171 pieces of body armour and a small number of ballistic helmets donate by Saskatoon Police Service to volunteers and civilians.
Pro patria Suomi-Ukraina Ry donated six ambulances equipped with defibrillators, ventilators, stretchers and oxygen tanks as well as €150,000 of humanitarian aid to Ukraine.
10 hospital beds, 200 wheelchairs, eight electric wheelchairs and 10 walking frames were donated by The Ukrainian Association of New Zealand.
26 Tatra T4D-M1 trams were donated to the city of Dnipro by the city of Leipzig.
Seven fire engines with additional equipment donated to Ukrainian firefighters by the Tipperary Fire and Rescue Service
£1.3 million donated by Lord Michael Ashcroft to the Olena Zelenska Foundation.
200 vehicles including fire engines, ambulances and pickup trucks donated to Ukraine by Taiwanese businessman Pai Tsan-jung.
One ambulance filled with medical supplies donated by the city of Sonoma, California to the city of Kaniv.
The city of Dortmund has donated a sewer cleaning vehicle to the city of Zhytomyr November 2024.
North Rhine-Westphalia has donated six fire and police vehicles to Dnipropetrovsk Oblast November 2024.
The International Atomic Energy Agency has donated two ambulances to provide medical support for Ukrainian nuclear powerplant staff.
Approximately 300 laptops, desktop computers, monitors, and accessories donated to Odessa schools by Tallinn City
400 generators and 70 stoves donated to Ukrainian civilians by the charity New Forest For Ukraine.
Three fire engines and a truck full of humanitarian supplies provided to Ukraine by the charity Scottish Emergency Rescue Association.
$107,590 raised by Russian opposition artists, musicians and writers in the Art Against War charity auction for Rubikus.HelpUA and Let's Do It! providing aid to frontline communities in Ukraine January 2025.
$A25 million provided by the Minderoo Foundation for demining and humanitarian aid.
Four fire engines donated to Ukraine by West Yorkshire Fire Authority.
3,000 explosive identification manuals provided to Ukrainian sappers by the Canadian charity Mriya Aid.
Two Ford Interceptor police cars donated by Sterling City Council to Ukrainian emergency services via US Ambulances for Ukraine.
149 fire and rescue vehicles and over 215,000 pieces of fire fighting equipment donated to Ukraine by 16 fire and rescue services in England and Wales in eight convoys.
A Božena 5 unmanned demining vehicle, a tractor, trailer, specialised van and a thermal drone for Kharkiv firefighters crowd funded by Czech organisation Gifts for Putin.
€302,158 raised for Okhmatdy Children's Hospital by the Czech organisation Gifts for Putin.
A retired fire engine donated to Ukraine by Peoria City Council March 2025.
Nine ambulances donated to Ukraine by Finnish volunteers April 2025.
59 ambulances filled with medical equipment and supplies donated to Ukraine by the London Ambulance Service.
A 12 cynlinder 600 kVA combined heat and power plant donated by the University of Kassel to an unspecified hospital in western Ukraine.
Two minibuses and projectors, laptops, printers, tablets, generators, folding furniture, thermal blankets, first aid kits and tents donated by The Estonian Voluntary Rescue Association to the psychological units of the State Emergency Service of Ukraine May 2025.
Two firefighting vehicles donated by Swedish volunteers to Ukraine State Emergency Services in Donetsk Oblast.
A 10 metre Scissor lift, a truck and a minibus donated by the town of Borna to the sister city of Irpin for infrastructure repair through the German Society for International Cooperation.
Over 100 lorries of humanitarian has been delivered to Ukraine by the Scottish charity Tayside and Strathearn Help for Ukraine since February 2022.
103 fire engines, ambulances and SUVs provided to Ukrainian Emergency Services by the American charity US Ambulances For Ukraine.


==== Beer for Ukraine ====
At the beginning of the invasion, Ukrainian brewery Pravda Beer Theatre, stopped brewing beer and started making Molotov cocktails. However the brewery shares their recipes and artwork to craft breweries worldwide to start making their beer and asked, if they do so, to make donations to their relief fund efforts. Many beer breweries worldwide began producing special beers whose proceeds would be donated to Ukraine, and spoke out against Putin's illegal actions. A number of breweries including Boston Beer Company brew the Resolve beer brand which donates all of its proceeds to Ukraine. The Boston Beer Company also donated $50,000 to World Central Kitchen, which provides prepared meals in Ukraine. Other breweries are brewing beer where (a part of) the revenue is donated to Ukraine, as shown on the website brewforukraine.beer. Also Untappd started a campaign to support Ukrainian beers.


=== Appealed and pledged by United Nations ===
The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs made an appeal for $1.7 billion in aid to the 2022 Ukrainian refugee crisis – including $1.1 billion in humanitarian aid to Ukraine – on 1 March 2022.
United Nations's under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator Martin Griffiths announced that $1.5 billion had been pledged. The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality has allocated over $14.6 million towards financing 120 civil society organisations in Ukraine organisations supporting women and girls in Ukraine and Ukrainian refugees in Moldova. Eight modular heating units are to be installed in Ukrainian hospitals as part of a World Health Organisation initiative. UNICEF has donated 336 medical kits valued at $200,000 to thirteen communities in Zhytomyr Oblast May 2024. The United Nations Development Programme has provided $1 million rehabilitation equipment to Ukrainian healthcare facilities June 2024. By 29 July 2024 the UN Food and Agriculture Organization has donated 114 generators and pledged another 131 generators to food producers and frontline companies in Ukraine with financial support from the German government. In September 2024 WHO opened a modular primary health-care clinic in the village of Tsyrkuny in Kharkiv Oblast. The United Nations Development Programme provided ten specially equipped vehicles to support health care and social services in Ukraine supported by the EU, Canadian and Danish governments. In October 2024, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs along with partner nations announced the allocation of $20 million in support of to support local organizations that help vulnerable categories of displaced civilians in Ukraine. $870,000 worth of equipment provided by the World Food Programme to small bakeries located to frontline regions of Ukraine to aid civilian food supplies. Eight refrigerated vans delivered to the Ukrainian ministry of health with support from the EU. 200 portable charging donated by Germany provided to Olena Zelenska Foundation by the UNHCR. 12 armoured medical vehicles with equipment provided to the State Emergency Service by UNDP, funded by Sweden Luxembourg, The Netherlands and Spain.


== Ukraine total aid by country ==
This list shows the number of countries support to Ukraine: Total bilateral allocations incl. EU aid - Allocations January 24, 2022 to December 31, 2024.


== Other responses ==
Initially, a Kawasaki C-2 of the Japan Self Defence Force had been given permission to land and fly on to the UAE, for carrying aid from India and Singapore. India responded that only civilian planes are allowed to deliver aid. This forced Japan to change how it delivered its humanitarian aid.
Taiwan has kept mainly to humanitarian and financial aid.


== See also ==
Corporate responses to the Russian invasion of Ukraine
Ukraine Democracy Defense Lend-Lease Act of 2022


=== Invasion ===
Prelude to the Russian invasion of Ukraine
Russian invasion of Ukraine
Timeline of the Russian invasion of Ukraine


=== Reactions ===
Potential enlargement of NATO
Government and intergovernmental reactions to the Russian invasion of Ukraine
Potential enlargement of the European Union
Protests against the Russian invasion of Ukraine
Reactions to the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis
Reactions to the Russian invasion of Ukraine


=== Sanctions, boycotts, censorship and cyberwarfare ===
Boycott of Russia and Belarus
International sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War
List of companies that applied sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War
Russo–Ukrainian cyberwarfare


=== Humanitarian crisis ===
Casualties of the Russo-Ukrainian War
Ukrainian refugee crisis (2022–present)
War crimes in the Russian invasion of Ukraine


== References ==


== External links ==

Ukraine Support Tracker – A Database of Military, Financial and Humanitarian Aid to Ukraine by the Kiel Institute for the World Economy