Mixpanel is an event analytics service company that tracks user interactions with web and mobile applications.
Data collected is used to build custom reports and measure user engagement and retention. Mixpanel works with web applications, in particular SaaS, but also supports mobile apps.


== History ==
Mixpanel was founded by Suhail Doshi and Tim Trefren in 2009 and is based in San Francisco, California. It is backed by Y Combinator, and its list of investors includes Andreessen Horowitz, Max Levchin and Keith Rabois. Doshi credits Levchin for Mixpanel's survival and subsequent success.
In April 2018, founder and CEO Suhail Doshi announced he would step down and become chairman of the board. He was replaced as CEO by Amir Movafaghi.
In May 2023, Mixpanel launched Mixpanel Marketing Analytics to allow marketers to track event-based analytics.
In Sept. 2025, Jen Taylor was named CEO.


== Funding ==
Mixpanel's second funding round happened in December 2014, a Series B round led by Andreessen Horowitz, with $65M raised at a pre-money valuation of $800M.
Mixpanel's most recent funding round happened in November 2021, raised a Series C round, a $200 million investment on a $1.05 billion valuation from Bain Capital Tech Opportunities.


== Mixpanel–OpenAI security incident (2025) ==
In November 2025, OpenAI disclosed that its third-party analytics provider Mixpanel had experienced a security incident involving unauthorized access to part of Mixpanel’s systems. According to OpenAI, an attacker exported a dataset containing limited customer-identifiable analytics information for some users of OpenAI’s API platform. Exposed data included names and email addresses associated with API accounts, coarse location metadata, browser and operating-system details, referring websites, and organization or user IDs. No chat data, API request content, logs, passwords, API keys, payment information, or other sensitive data were affected.
OpenAI removed Mixpanel from its production environment, began notifying impacted users, and initiated a broader review of external vendors. Mixpanel stated that the incident resulted from a targeted SMS-based social-engineering attack and said it had revoked sessions, rotated credentials, blocked malicious IPs, and engaged external cybersecurity investigators. OpenAI advised affected users to remain vigilant against phishing or social-engineering attempts.


== References ==


== General references ==
Gage, Deborah (September 10, 2014). "In 'Unicorn Hire,' Mixpanel Lures Top Sales Executive From New Relic". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 20, 2016.
Lawler, Ryan (July 29, 2013). "Now Analyzing More Than 15 Billion Actions A Month, Mixpanel Launches A Big Marketing Campaign And A Conference About Analytics". TechCrunch. Retrieved September 20, 2016.
Birani, B.; Birani, M. (2016). iOS Forensics Cookbook. Packt Publishing. p. 53–. ISBN 978-1-78528-535-6. (subscription required)


== External links ==
Official website