Numerix is an American capital markets front-to-risk technology provider. It is headquartered in New York City with nineteen offices worldwide.
The company develops analytics and software for risk management, trading, valuations and pricing for both sell-side and buyside market participants. It is in front-office risk technology and cross-asset analytics for OTC derivatives, structured products, and variable annuities, providing software and services for structuring, pre-trade pricing, trade capture and valuation.
Approximately 700 clients and 90 partners across more than 26 different countries use software developed by Numerix. Its partners include MathWorks, Broadridge, Nomura Research Institute, Oracle, ICE Data Services, Tradition Market Data, ActiveViam, Microsoft, and Amazon Web Services
In August 2022, Numerix was acquired by Genstar Capital. In April 2023, Numerix acquired FINCAD. In July 2023, Numerix acquired PolyPaths. 
"When numbers matter", is the tagline most often associated with Numerix. 


== History ==
Numerix was founded in 1996 by Alexander Sokol, Nigel Goldenfeld, Mitchell Feigenbaum and Michael Goodkin as a software company selling multi-asset class pricing tool kits. Numerix CrossAsset remains as one of the industry's most comprehensive collection of models offering full portfolio coverage and broad instrument support for fixed income/rates, equity, FX, credit, commodities, inflation, longevity, volatility and hybrids.
Numerix CrossAsset is used to price financial derivatives and calculate risk analytics – ranging from credit risk, market risk, stress testing, back testing, scenario generation and risk reporting.
After making a significant investment in the company, Greg Whitten invested an additional US$32 million in 2001.
Numerix continued to grow and build out its front office XVA adjustments for pre-trade pricing, as well as counterparty credit risk exposures and market risk measures. In 2016, it introduced Oneview, its flagship risk management software, which is a real-time, front and middle office platform with a microservices' architecture, designed for pre-trade pricing, post-trade valuations, XVAs, counterparty risk, market risk, margin and capital calculations.
Emanuele Conti, who has held CEO and executive leaderships roles at Opus Global, Kroll, and Dun & Bradstreet, was appointed CEO in May 2023. Emanuele proceeds Steven O'Hanlon, who had been Numerix's CEO since January 2013. O'Hanlon had been COO from 2004 to 2013 and is now the Vice Chairman for Numerix.


== Acquisitions ==
In April 2023, Numerix acquired Vancouver, Canada-based FINCAD, a leading analytics company in the pricing and risk analytics of financial derivatives and fixed-income products, from Zafin.
In August 2023, the company completed its acquisition of PolyPaths.
In October 2024, Numerix acquired Kynex, a financial platform specializing in convertible securities valuation, portfolio and risk management, and trade flow/order management.


== Competitors ==
Numerix’ direct competitors are SunGard-FastVal, MSCI, Quantifi, swissQuant and Pricing Partners a Thomson Reuters company.


== References ==