Mian Muhammad Shehbaz Sharif (born 23 September 1951) is a Pakistani politician and businessman who has served as the 20th prime minister of Pakistan since March 2024, having previously been in the role between April 2022 to August 2023. He has also served as the president of the Pakistan Muslim League (N) and chief minister of Punjab three times, making him the longest-serving person in the role.
Sharif was elected to the Punjab Assembly in 1988 and to the National Assembly of Pakistan in 1990. He was re-elected to the Punjab Assembly in 1993 and appointed leader of the opposition. He was elected as chief minister of Pakistan's most populous province, Punjab, for the first time on 20 February 1997. After the 1999 Pakistani coup d'état, Sharif, along with his family, spent years of self-exile in Saudi Arabia, returning to Pakistan in 2007. Sharif was appointed chief minister for a second term after the PML(N)'s victory in Punjab in the 2008 Pakistani general election. He was elected as chief minister of Punjab for the third time after the 2013 Punjab provincial election and served his term until his party's defeat in the 2018 Punjab provincial election. Sharif was nominated as the president of the PML(N) after his brother, Nawaz Sharif, was disqualified from holding office in the wake of the Panama Papers case.
He was nominated as the leader of the opposition after the 2018 general election, and elected prime minister in 2022 after the no-confidence motion against Imran Khan was passed in the National Assembly. After the PML(N) received a minority in the 2024 general election, Sharif became prime minister with a coalition government.


== Early life and education ==
Sharif was born on 23 September 1951 in Lahore, West Punjab. His family is Punjabi with Kashmiri ancestry. Sharif's father, Mian Muhammad Sharif, was an upper-middle-class businessman and industrialist whose family had emigrated from Anantnag in Kashmir for business, and eventually settled in the village of Jati Umra in Amritsar district, Punjab, at the beginning of the twentieth century. His mother's family came from Pulwama. Following the partition of India and Pakistan's independence in 1947, his parents migrated from Amritsar to Lahore. He has two brothers, Abbas Sharif and Nawaz Sharif. Nawaz is a three-time elected Prime Minister of Pakistan, serving the longest non-consecutive tenure in the role. Nawaz's wife, Kulsoom Nawaz, was the First Lady of Pakistan for three non-consecutive terms and his daughter, Maryam Nawaz is the current Chief Minister of Punjab.
Sharif attended St. Anthony High School, Lahore, and received a Bachelor of Arts degree from the Government College University, Lahore. After his graduation, he joined his family-owned Ittefaq Group. He was elected president of Lahore Chamber of Commerce & Industry in 1985. Sharif can speak Urdu, Punjabi, Sindhi, English, German and Arabic.


== Early political career ==
Sharif began his political career after getting elected to the Punjab Assembly from Constituency PP-122 (Lahore-VII) as a candidate of the Islami Jamhoori Ittehad (IJI) in the 1988 general election. Head 22,372 votes and defeated a candidate of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP). However, his term prematurely ended in 1990 when the assemblies were dissolved.
He was re-elected to the Provincial Assembly of Punjab from Constituency PP-124 (Lahore-IX) as an IJI candidate in the 1990 general election. He received 26,408 votes and defeated a candidate of the Pakistan Democratic Alliance (PDA). In the same election, he was elected to the National Assembly of Pakistan from Constituency NA-96 (Lahore-V) as a candidate of IJI. He secured 54,506 votes and defeated Jehangir Bader. He vacated the Punjab Assembly seat to retain his National Assembly seat. His term prematurely ended in 1993 when the assemblies were dissolved.
He was re-elected to the Punjab Assembly from Constituency PP-125 (Lahore-X) as a candidate of the Pakistan Muslim League (N) (PML(N)), a new party founded by his brother, Nawaz, in the 1993 general election. He received 28,068 votes and defeated a candidate of PPP. In the same election, he was re-elected to the National Assembly from Constituency NA-96 (Lahore-V) as a candidate of the PML(N). He secured 55,867 votes and defeated Yousuf Salahuddin. He vacated the National Assembly seat and retained his Provincial Punjab Assembly seat. Shortly after the election, he was elected Leader of the Opposition in the Punjab Assembly. During his tenure as Leader of the Opposition, he travelled to the United Kingdom for medical treatment. In his absence, Chaudhry Pervaiz Elahi was made Acting Leader of the Opposition in the Punjab Assembly. His term as a member of the Punjab Assembly and Leader of the Opposition prematurely ended in November 1996 when the assemblies were dissolved.


== Chief Minister of Punjab (1997–1999) ==

Sharif was re-elected to the Punjab Assembly from Constituency PP-125 (Lahore-X) as a candidate of the PML(N) in the 1997 Punjab provincial election. He received 25,013 votes and defeated a candidate of PPP. In the same election, he was re-elected to the National Assembly from Constituency NA-96 (Lahore-V) as a candidate of PML(N). He secured 47,614 votes and defeated Hanif Ramay. He was elected as the Chief Minister of Punjab for the first time and was sworn in as 13th Chief Minister of Punjab on 20 February 1997.
Sharif focused on healthcare, education, agriculture and the promotion of industry in Punjab. He undertook several development projects in Lahore and launched a crackdown on criminals across the province to maintain law and order. Sharif introduced a series of educational reforms such as reformed exams in a variety of subjects, as well as self-finance schemes for students.
He held his office until 12 October 1999 when was removed from the post of Chief Minister in the 1999 Pakistani coup d'état. Following the coup he was imprisoned. In December 2000, he, along with his immediate family members, was forcibly exiled to Saudi Arabia following the request of the Saudi royal family.
While in exile in Saudi Arabia, Sharif was elected as the PML(N) President in August 2002 and moved to the United Kingdom in 2003 for medical treatment.


== Trial and exile ==
In 1999, a complainant, Saeeduddin, lodged a first information report and accused Sharif of allowing the Punjab Police, as chief minister, to kill his son along with other men in a fake encounter. In the encounter, his two sons and three other people were killed by the police.
In 2003, an anti-terrorism court summoned Sharif and five others accused in alleged extrajudicial killings in 1998. He was in the exile at that time and failed to show-up to the court. Later, the court issued an arrest warrant for Sharif. In 2004, Sharif attempted to return to Pakistan to appear before the court, but was forcibly deported back to Saudi Arabia.
In August 2007, the Supreme Court of Pakistan gave its verdict which allowed the Sharif and Nawaz Sharif to return to Pakistan. In September 2007, an anti-terrorism court in Pakistan ordered police to arrest Sharif based on a 2003 arrest warrant. He later achieved bail from an anti-terrorism court. Sharif denied ordering the alleged killings and said the charges against him were politically motivated. He further added that in 2004, he had landed at Lahore Airport, wanting to appear before the court, but was sent back to Saudi Arabia by the government in violation of the orders of the Supreme Court. In 2008, he was acquitted by the Anti-Terrorism Court in the Sabzazar case.
Sharif was re-elected as PML(N) President for a second term in August 2006 and returned to Pakistan along with Nawaz Sharif in November 2007.
Sharif was ineligible to take part in the 2008 general election due to the Sabzazar case, but a few months later he was acquitted by the court.


== Chief Minister of Punjab (2008–2018) ==

Sharif was re-elected to the Punjab Assembly unopposed from Constituency PP-48 (Bhakkar-II) as a PML(N) candidate in the by-election held in June 2008. Subsequently, he was elected unopposed as the Chief Minister of Punjab, receiving 265 votes unopposed after securing 265 votes. Later, in June 2008, while holding the Assembly seat from Constituency PP-48 (Bhakkar-II), Sharif contested for a seat in the Punjab Assembly from Constituency PP-10 (Rawalpindi-X). He was elected unopposed but resigned from this seat due to a dispute regarding his eligibility to serve as chief minister.
His second term as chief minister was interrupted on 25 February 2009 when the Supreme Court of Pakistan declared him ineligible to hold public office, resulting in the vacancy of his seat in the Punjab Assembly and his removal from the office of chief minister. On 1 April 2009, a five-member larger bench of the Supreme Court overturned the earlier decision, reinstating Sharif as chief minister.
In the 2013 general election, Sharif was re-elected to the Punjab Assembly from three Constituencies PP-159 (Lahore-XXIII), PP-161 (Lahore-XXV) and PP-247 (Rajanpur-I), as a PML(N) candidate. In the same election, he was re-elected to the National Assembly from Constituency NA-129 (Lahore-XII). Sharif chose to retain his Provincial Assembly seat PP-159 (Lahore-XXIII) and was re-elected as chief minister of Punjab for the third time, receiving 300 votes in the 371-member Provincial Assembly.


=== Intra-party politics ===
In 2016, Sharif was elected unopposed as the president of the PML(N)'s Punjab chapter in intra-party elections.
On 29 July 2017, following the disqualification of outgoing Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif after the Panama Papers case decision, Sharif was named leader of the PML(N) and their candidate for the office of prime minister. However, he was not a member of the National Assembly, so Petroleum Minister Shahid Khaqan Abbasi was asked to serve as the interim prime minister of Pakistan, allowing Sharif enough time to enter the legislature through a by-election. Later, Sharif decided to complete his tenure as chief minister until the next general election.
In December 2017, Sharif was named as the candidate of PML(N) for the office of prime minister in the 2018 general election.
In February 2018, Sharif was appointed the interim president of the PML(N). In March 2018, he was elected unopposed as the president of PML(N). It was reported that the establishment had previously offered Sharif the position of prime minister of Pakistan on several occasions, which he did not accept.


== Leader of the Opposition (2018–2022) ==

Sharif was elected to the National Assembly as a candidate of PML(N) from Constituency NA-132 (Lahore-X)	in the 2018 Pakistani general election. In the same election, he was re-elected to the Provincial Assembly of Punjab as a candidate of PML(N) from Constituency PP-164 (Lahore-XXI) and PP-165 (Lahore-XXII). Following his successful election, he abandoned his Punjab seats in favour of the National assembly seat.
On 16 August 2018, he was nominated by PML(N) for the office of Prime Minister of Pakistan. The following day, he secured 96 votes, losing to Imran Khan. Later, he was nominated for the office of Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly by 111 members of the National Assembly. On 20 August 2018, he was notified as Leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly. Concurrently, he served as Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee from 22 December 2018 until 28 November 2019, when he resigned and was succeeded by Rana Tanveer Hussain.
In September 2020, the National Accountability Bureau (NAB) arrested Sharif on charges of laundering Rs. 7,328 million (US$41 million) through a purported scheme involving close associates and family members. The NAB had previously frozen 23 properties owned by Sharif, his son, and other relatives, alleging these assets were acquired through unknown sources of income and that foreign funds were funneled via fake transactions through a company owned by Sharif's son-in-law, Haroon Yousaf.
Following his arrest, Sharif was held in custody during the investigation. In November 2020, he was temporarily released on parole to attend his mother's funeral prayers. On 14 April 2021, he was granted bail by the Lahore High Court in the money laundering case. On 12 October 2022, Sharif and his son were acquitted on all charges of corruption and money laundering by the Special Court Central in Lahore. After the verdict, Sharif's lawyer Amjad Pervez described the case as "totally baseless and politically motivated."


== Prime Minister (2022–2023) ==

On 10 April 2022, Sharif was nominated as a candidate for prime minister by opposition parties following the no-confidence motion against Imran Khan after the 2022 Pakistani constitutional crisis. He was elected prime minister on 11 April 2022. He took the oath of office on the same day, administered by the Chairman of the Senate, Sadiq Sanjrani, acting for President Arif Alvi, who was on medical leave after complaining of "discomfort".


=== Domestic policy ===
Sharif's main priority upon his ascension as prime minister in 2022 was to resolve the severe economic crisis that began that year, as rising fuel prices due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, excessive borrowing, poor macroeconomic decision-making, a balance of payments crisis, among other factors had accumulated into a severe crisis that strained the nation's economy. Sharif also vowed to investigate Imran Khan's allegations of American intervention to instigate the latter's removal from power, vowing to step down if an "iota of evidence" was found against him. Sharif promised to enact electoral reforms to ensure that free and fair elections occurred.


==== Economic policy ====
Soon after Sharif's swearing-in ceremony, the government announced a relief package that included various measures such as raising the minimum wage from Rs. 21,000 to Rs. 25,000, subsidising wheat flour, a 10% raise in pensions, and a government employee salary reduction to less than Rs. 100,000 rupees. He also revived the Benazir Income Support Programme for poverty reduction, expanding it to educational aid.
In order to resolve skyrocketing fuel prices, Sharif sought to amplify energy production from power projects. He expressed his intentions to resolve the lack of profit from Pakistan's coal of reserves, suggesting that the Thar Engro Coal Power Project could be connected to other coal-powered plants and amplify production to up to 4,000 megawatts. Sharif further suggested that the Thar Project could revive the national economy and save the government up to $6 billion as the expenditure on energy imports rose to $24 billion.
Under Sharif's premiership, Pakistan's inflation rate skyrocketed to a multi-decade high of 27.3% in September 2022 and 37.97% in May 2023. 
In January 2023, 7 million textile workers became unemployed due to decreasing exports and the government's failure to end the economic crisis.
Despite negotiations with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for a relief package for Pakistan's economy, the Pakistani rupee continued to depreciate under Sharif's tenure, with increasing inflation, unemployment, and low profits damaging business in Pakistan. The government's target of $7.7 billion for FY 2023 for foreign commercial loans also slumped, with only $0.2 billion gained from July to October 2022.
Sharif's government continued negotiations with the IMF for a relief package to mitigate the effects of the economic crisis, with a staff-level agreement reached in June 2023 for a $3 billion stand-by arrangement. In July 2023, the IMF's executive board approved the loan and begin a disbursement of roughly $1.2 billion. To secure the loan, Sharif's government instituted austerity measures in its annual budget, raising taxes by $750 million and hiking its interest rate to 22%, measures to curb inflation.


==== 2022 Pakistan floods ====
In 2022, Sindh and Balochistan received more rainfall than the August average, with 784% and 500% more, respectively. In addition to this rise in rainfall, southern Pakistan experienced back-to-back heat waves in May and June 2022, which were record-setting made more likely by climate change. These conditions created a strong thermal low that brought heavier rains than usual. on 25 August 2022, Sharif's government declared a nationwide state of emergency due to the floods, which killed 1,760 people and caused over roughly $30–40 billion in damage.

In response to the floods and farmer sit-ins over electricity and fuel bills, Sharif launched the Kissan Package for farmers' relief, forming a federal committee and unveiling a Rs. 600 billion package. As a part of this package, the government would provide Rs. 50 billion subsidised loans to young entrepreneurs in the agriculture sector across the country, alongside Rs. 10 billion to small and medium enterprises in the agriculture sector. In addition to these measures, the package rolled out Rs. 5 billion to landless farmers affected by the floods, and the provision of 1.2 million bags of certified seeds flood-affected farmers. In regards to cost divisions, Sharif stated that the federal government would provide 50% of the contributions while the four provinces would provide the other 50%. Sharif's government also reduced duties on knock-down kits tractor parts fro 35 to 15%, and wheat imports were enhanced to 2.6 million tonnes in order to prevent a national wheat shortage. These measures in the Kissan Package were implemented to enhance the agriculture sector and its related sectors such as the fertiliser industry, and particularly to mitigate the harmful economic effects of the floods on the country.


==== Energy policy ====
Sharif's ascension as prime minister was also marked by an energy crisis in Pakistan as a result of a failure to open completed projects and global fuel and energy prices hiking due to the Russo-Ukrainian War and the COVID-19 pandemic. In June 2025, Sharif's government opted out of an LNG import of $39.8 per MMBTU because of its unaffordability, instead relying on nationwide loadshedding. As a result of this decision, Sharif warned Pakistanis to prepare for loadshedding for the following month as he stated that his government would try and make an energy duel for LNG imports possible. In July 2022, Sharif ordered the resumption of energy production from closed power plants such as the Punjab Thermal Power Plant and the Sahiwal Coal Power Project. Projects such as these two plants were delayed because of a lack of ownership or the breakdown of contractual commitments.
Under his premiership, Sharif began the transition all government buildings to solar power to reduce the government's fuel import bill. He added that this move would be an example for the country's provincial governments, urging provincial leaders to follow suit and standardise the use of solar power for government buildings.


=== Foreign affairs ===
 
Sharif's government sought to improve ties with the United States after strained relations due to Lettergate, despite Pakistan's close ties with China. Sharif met U.S. President Joe Biden in New York City in September 2022 during the United Nations General Assembly annual summit. During the meeting, Biden pledged support to Pakistan in the aftermath of the devastating floods. In October 2022, President Biden called Pakistan "one of the most dangerous nations in the world" during an address in California. Sharif and Foreign Minister Bilawal Bhutto Zardari rejected the statement as baseless, and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs summoned the U.S. ambassador for an explanation of Biden's remarks.
Sharif also sought closer ties with China and the amplification of the China–Pakistan Economic Corridor. However, relations grew increasingly complicated due to a rise in attacks on Chinese workers by groups such as the Pakistani Taliban and Balochistan Liberation Army, as the Pakistan Army is responsible for the security of CPEC workers. Sharif visited China on a two-day official visit in November 2022, meeting with Chinese President Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang, and visiting after the 20th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party. Sharif pledged to revitalize CPEC and expand trade.
Sharif's first visit as prime minister was to Saudi Arabia in April 2022 on a three-day official visit, where he met with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman. Sharif's government also secured an $8 billion package from Saudi Arabia in May 2022, alongside an expansion to a $2.4 billion oil financing facility funded by Saudi Arabia. Sharif visited the United Arab Emirates and Qatar to secure investments in Pakistan; he expressed his desire to facilitate a strong and healthy business environment in Pakistan for Qatari investors during a Pakistan-Qatar trade and investment roundtable meeting in Doha; 2022.

Sharif visited Turkey and met with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan on several occasions, seeking to further deepen Pakistan-Turkey relations and enhance trade. He invited Turkey to join CPEC.
Sharif's government also inaugurated a new power transmission line with Iran during a ceremony in Pishin along the Iran–Pakistan border with Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi, facilitating the transmission of up to 100 megawatts of Iranian electricity to Pakistan. Sharif's government also remained committed to the construction of an Iran–Pakistan gas pipeline.
Sharif visited the United Kingdom during the funeral of Elizabeth II in September 2022 as the head of government of a Commonwealth republic,  offering condolences to Charles III and meeting with British prime minister Liz Truss. Sharif again visited the United Kingdom for the coronation of Charles III and Queen Camilla, attending the ceremony at Westminster Abbey and meeting with British prime minister Rishi Sunak.


== Between premierships ==
On 9 August 2023, Sharif suggested the dissolution of parliament to President Arif Alvi, three days before the end of its term. On 14 August, the 76th independence day of Pakistan, Sharif's term ended as prime minister and Anwaar ul Haq Kakar was appointed caretaker prime minister until a general election would be held.

On 21 October 2023, Sharif welcomed the return of his brother, Nawaz Sharif, to Pakistan after four years of self-imposed exile. Nawaz returned to Pakistan after obtaining protective bail two days prior, which allowed him to return without being arrested. Nawaz's acquisition of protective bail was a result of the Shehbaz government's adoption of a law which allowed for review petitions against previous Supreme Court verdicts to be filed. Shehbaz was a part of the PML(N) welcome rally for Nawaz in Lahore, where tens of thousands of PML(N) supporters awaited Nawaz's arrival.
On 22 December 2023, the Election Commission of Pakistan ruled that the PTI would not be allowed to use its party symbol in the upcoming elections, citing that the party failed to hold intra-party elections up to the commission's standards. This decision was widely controversial and viewed as pre-poll rigging by eliminating PTI opposition, thus clearing the way for Nawaz Sharif to win the election and become prime minister with ease.
A general election was held on 8 February 2024, with Nawaz Sharif serving as the PML(N) candidate for prime minister. However, Nawaz did not get his projected easy victory as PTI candidates, running as independents, managed to secure the most seats. The PML(N) won the second most seats while the PPP won the third most; however, neither the independent candidates or the two largest parties were able to secure the 169 seats needed for a majority. On 20 February, the PML(N) and PPP formed a minority coalition government, and Shehbaz was chosen as the prime ministerial candidate over Nawaz. As a part of the coalition arrangement, senior PPP leader Asif Ali Zardari, was chosen as the coalition's candidate for president. The general election was marred with controversy as Pakistan's Military Establishment was accused of rigging the election to prevent the PTI from winning. International media also denounced the election while members of the international community voiced concern over its fairness.


== Prime Minister (2024–present) ==

On 3 March 2024, Sharif was re-elected as prime minister of Pakistan for a second term after a controversial general election, as he received 201 votes against 92 votes for the PTI candidate, Omar Ayub Khan. He formed a minority government with the Pakistan People's Party, Muttahida Qaumi Movement – Pakistan, the Pakistan Muslim League (Q), the Istehkam-e-Pakistan Party, and the Balochistan Awami Party.


=== Economy ===

Immediately after his swearing-in ceremony, Sharif directed preparations for a national action plan to amplify economic revival. As a part of this plan, Sharif initiated talks with the IMF for a loan agreement and ordered the Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) to clear tax refunds worth Rs. 65 billion. He also stated that state-owned institutions that caused heavy losses for the government would be privatised, and that the gas sector would adopt smart metering to reduce line losses. Sharif appointed Muhammad Aurangzeb, former president of Habib Bank Limited and JPMorgan banker, as finance minister.
Sharif's government negotiated a bailout agreement with the IMF in July 2024, and secured a $7 billion loan from the IMF in September 2024. However, despite the loan, the government raised taxes by 40% as a part of a new tax scheme to comply with strict IMF regulations. Despite the rise of taxes for Pakistan's middle class, Sharif failed to cut state expenses after a new fiscal year in July 2024. The government also included private companies into the new tax scheme, bumping up exporters' tax rate from 1% to 29%, in addition to a corporate tax of 30%, the highest in South Asia.
Sharif's government also created a comprehensive five-year plan for economic development, titled “Uraan Pakistan: Homegrown National Economic Plan.” As a part of this plan, the government vowed to enhance export-led growth, expand the digital and technology sectors, and address economic challenges through what it described as the "five Es: Exports; E-Pakistan; Equity and Empowerment; Environment, Food and Water Security; and Energy and Infrastructure." The plan also established quantitative targets, particularly achieving a 6% annual GDP growth by 2028, the creation of 1 million jobs per year, boosting exports to $60 billion annually by 2028, and $10 billion worth of private investment annually. The plan also envisaged Pakistan to emerge as a trillion dollar economy by 2035.
Despite big claims of austerity, Sharif's government increased the salaries of ministers and advisers by 188%, to Rs519,000 per month while the common public was struggling financially and being told to spend less.
In May 2025, the government also announced its intention to privatise over 50 state-owned enterprises (SOEs) except "strategic ones" in three phases within the next four years. The large-scale privatisation of SOEs was a recommendation by the IMF because these SOEs hold sizable assets in Pakistan; however, they have low employment and are cash-bleeding with over half of SOEs in Pakistan operating at a loss. That month, inflation slowed down to 3.5%.


=== Youth empowerment ===
Sharif's government promoted youth empowerment and entrepreneurship. On International Youth Day in 2024, Sharif announced an Rs.100 billion boost for over 300,000 young entrepreneurs as a part of the Prime Minister's Youth Programme, in addition to the launch of several youth empowerment schemes. He also announced that the government would provide 1 million smartphones, tablets, and laptops to students across the country on the basis of merit, alongside personally funding the education of 1,000 graduates of agriculture in China.  Sharif also created a youth employment action plan across Pakistan. As a part of this plan, a laptop scheme provided over 600,000 laptops on the basis of merit to young Pakistanis, in addition to youth training initiatives across 268 universities across the country under the Prime Minister Green Youth Program. Sharif also formed the National Youth Council, composed of 113 youth representatives (aged 10–29), aimed at amplifying youth development and integrating young Pakistanis into policy-making.


=== Healthcare ===
On World Health Day in 2024, Sharif vowed to expand medical facilities across Pakistan to be accessible for all people, partnering with provincial governments to upgrade and establish medical facilities, launch mobile health clinics, and ensure cost-free treatment for lower-and-middle class families. Sharif also ordered the use of advanced technology to advance digitised health reforms across the country, alongside the creation of oversight mechanisms to crack down on healthcare violations.


=== Environment ===
At the 2024 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Baku in November 2024, Sharif presented Pakistan’s priorities for climate, emphasising the need for global "climate justice." Moreover, he revealed his government's National Climate Finance Strategy (NCFS), which sought to reduce Pakistan's greenhouse gas emissions to 50% of the national economy, leveraging 60% of clean energy resources, and shifting 30% of vehicles to electric vehicles (EVs) by 2030.
Sharif's government enhanced climate cooperation with international partners including through the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation's Green Belt Programme and the Mangrove Sustainability Initiative, a project to protect, restore, and manage mangrove ecosystems across the globe.


=== Constitutional changes ===
In September 2024, Sharif's government announced a "Constitutional Package" which would create a new Federal Constitutional Court. This new court would handle petitions pertaining strictly to interpretations of constitutional clauses. The package also included raising the retirement age of judges in the proposed Constitutional Court to 68, while other judges in Pakistan are required to retire by 65. The package also included a clause that would rule individual legislators' votes against their respective parties as void. In October 2024, Parliament passed the Twenty-sixth Amendment, which expanded parliamentary powers, particularly allowing a parliamentary committee to select the Supreme Court's chief justice. The new amendment was heavily criticized as attacking judicial independence, particularly amplifying judicial action against the PTI and other political opponents. According to the New York City Bar Association, the amendment undermined the separation of powers and judicial independence in Pakistan, hindering the impartiality of the judiciary.
In November 2025, Parliament passed the twenty-seventh Amendment to the Constitution of Pakistan proposed by Sharif's government, which asserted the authority of the Federal Constitutional Court—in which judges are selected by the executive branch, and modified Pakistan's military strucute. The amendment created the post of Chief of Defence Forces—given to Field Marshal Asim Munir—which oversees all three branches of the Pakistan Armed Forces, and provides Munir with lifelong immunity from criminal prosecution. The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan questioned the government's urgency in passing the amendment, while Reema Omer, a legal adviser for the International Commission of Jurists, warned that the new amendment only emboldens the executive and legislative branches, weakening the authority of the judiciary and degrading any balance of power within the government. She described the amendment as a "constitutional surrender." 


=== Counterterrorism initiatives ===
In June 2024, Sharif chaired a meeting of the Apex Committee on the National Action Plan in Islamabad, and announced the launch of Operation Azm-e-Istehkam, a major counterterrorism initiative that involved both military action and socioeconomic development to hinder the spread of radicalism and terrorism in Pakistan. The launch of the operation came amidst a rise in terrorism in Pakistan in the aftermath of the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan, with militant groups such as the Pakistani Taliban taking shelter in Afghanistan to use it as a base for attacks on Pakistani security forces.
Sharif's government has repeatedly accused India of financially supporting the Pakistani Taliban and other militant groups that operate in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan, describing the Pakistani Taliban as Fitna-al-khawarij and Baloch rebel groups as Fitna-al-Hindustan.


=== Democratic backsliding ===
Immediately after becoming prime minister for his second term, PTI supporters across Pakistan began major protests and demonstrations on 11 March, calling for Sharif's removal from office on allegations of electoral rigging in the 2024 general election. These protests also called for the restoration of the PTI's "stolen mandate" and the release of senior PTI leaders, including Imran Khan and Shah Mahmood Qureshi. In response to these protests, the Pakistani police launched a large-scale national crackdown, arresting and attacking PTI protestors.

On 15 July 2024, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar announced that the government was considering a ban on the PTI, citing the violent 2023 Pakistani protests and the PTI allegedly "leaking classified information." The plan to ban the PTI received large-scale backlash from both inside Pakistan and internationally, with several prominent politicians, journalists, and lawyers condemning the move. According to the Brookings Institution, the move against the PTI revealed the government's "weakness and political insecurity," and the move comes during a period where the judiciary of Pakistan is experiencing increasing state pressure to crack down on political opposition.
Sharif's government continued the unofficial ban on social media platform Twitter (X) imposed by the Kakar caretaker government, and installed an internet firewall. The firewall was created by the government in order to block content that it deemed as propaganda. The firewall was widely criticized for censorship. Furthermore, the internet firewall project was estimated to cost $300 Million. The firewall negatively affected businesses in Pakistan.


=== Civil-military relations ===

During his premiership, Sharif has maintained positive relations with the Pakistani military. Sharif publicly stated that his government and the military were “on the same page” regarding all key national issues, including national security, counterterrorism, and economic development. 
Sharif developed a particularly cordial relationship with Chief of Army Staff Asim Munir, describing his relationship with the army as a "role model" for the future. The two leaders held multiple joint meetings on national security and foreign policy, including consultations on Pakistan’s response to India following the 2025 India–Pakistan conflict.
In May 2025, the federal cabinet approved Munir’s promotion to the rank of Field Marshal, citing his “decisive leadership” during the conflict. The promotion ceremony, attended by both Sharif and President Asif Ali Zardari, was held at the Aiwan-e-Sadr in Islamabad, where Munir was formally conferred the baton of Field Marshal.
Sharif’s cooperative stance with the military was seen as an effort to maintain political stability and avoid confrontation with the country's powerfulmilitary establishment. His government’s approach was described by Defence Minister Khawaja Asif as a “hybrid model” of governance, combining civilian and military decision-making in national and economic affairs. 


=== Foreign policy ===


==== Middle East ====
Sharif's first foreign visit during his second premiership was to Saudi Arabia in 2024, where he met Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman. As a part of this meeting, Sharif and bin Salman agreed to extradite the first wave of a $5 billion Saudi investment package to Pakistan. In September 2025, Sharif announced the creation of the Strategic Mutual Defence Agreement, a mutual defence pact with Saudi Arabia, in the aftermath of the Israeli attack on Doha earlier that month; however, the Saudi government stated the agreement was a result of "years of discussions" rather than a response to a recent regional development. Sharif also met with Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi in April 2024, vowing to strengthen economic and security cooperation in the aftermath of a short tit-for-tat conflict between the two nations in January of that year. In June 2025, Sharif expressed his support for Iran amidst the Iran–Israel war.
Sharif emphasized warm relations with the United Arab Emirates, meeting with UAE President Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan on several occasions. Sharif and bin Zayed agreed to enhance Emirati investments in Pakistan. In May 2024, bin Zayed committed to invest $10 billion in Pakistan.

In November 2025, Sharif welcomed King Abdullah II of Jordan to Pakistan on a two-day visit, welcoming him to the Global Industrial Defence Solutions in Rawalpindi for a review of Pakistan's indigenous defence production and potential bilateral military cooperation.
Sharif repeatedly condemned Israel's war in Gaza—which he described as a genocide—expressing sympathy with the Palestinian people and support for an independent Palestinian state. In September 2025, he expressed strong support for Donald Trump's Gaza Strip proposal, calling it "a vital step towards peace in the Middle East." Sharif also praised Trump’s leadership and the efforts of U.S. Special Envoy Steve Witkoff in resolving the conflict. In response, Trump commended Sharif, saying he "fully support[s] the plan 100 per cent."


==== Turkey and Azerbaijan ====
Sharif attended a trilateral summit between Pakistan, Turkey, and Azerbaijan, in Lachin, Azerbaijan. Sharif thanked both nations for their diplomatic and moral support for Pakistan during the conflict with India, and vowed greater cooperation. Moreover Sharif's government enhanced military cooperation between the three countries. For instance, in January 2025, Pakistan and Turkiye agreed to establish and operate a joint facility for TAI TF Kaan fighter jets. In November 2025, Sharif attended a victory parade in Baku to mark the 5th anniversary of the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War, describing the Azerbaijani "liberation" of Nagorno-Karabakh as a beacon of hope for both the people of Palestine and Indian-administered Kashmir which he described as "occupied nations."


==== United States ====

In April 2025, Sharif met with a United States delegation led by Eric Meyer, Senior Bureau Official for the State Department’s Bureau of South and Central Asian Affairs, and announced that U.S. companies seek to invest in Pakistan's untapped minerals. Sharif also emphasized the cruciality of American mediation in de-escalating the 2025 India-Pakistan conflict, with the Pakistani government nominating Donald Trump for the Nobel Peace Prize for his role in mediating an end to the conflict. Trump also met with Pakistan's Chief of Army Staff Asim Munir in June 2025, signaling a major thaw in relations between the two countries. In July, Sharif's government negotiated a trade deal with the U.S. which included American investment in Pakistan's crude oil reserves in its territorial waters. The deal also included partnerships in cryptocurrency and information technology. In September 2025, Sharif attended a conference with Muslim leaders and Trump on the sidelines of the Eightieth session of the United Nations General Assembly to establish an end to the Gaza war. In the same month, Sharif visited the White House and met with Trump. During the 2025 Gaza Peace Summit, Sharif announced his intention to nominate Trump for the Nobel Peace Prize for a second time.


==== China ====
Sharif's government pledged to revive the stagnating CPEC through cooperation on infrastructure and mining. This desire to amplify cooperation comes amidst increasing attacks on Chinese workers in Pakistan by militant groups aiming at disrupting CPEC, which has affected China-Pakistan relations. However, China's significant defence cooperation with Pakistan contributed to Pakistan's success in downing Western-manufactured Indian aircraft, particularly Rafales, during its 2025 conflict against India.


==== South Asia ====

In October 2024, Sharif welcomed Indian Foreign Minister S. Jaishankar for the 2024 Islamabad SCO summit, the first visit by an Indian foreign minister to Pakistan since 2015. However, relations between India and Pakistan soured during his premiership as India blamed Pakistan for inciting a terrorist attack on tourists in Pahalgam, Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir, which Pakistan strongly denied and demanded an international investigation. After the attack, India launched several diplomatic actions such as the cancellation of the Indus Waters Treaty, the expulsion of Pakistani diplomats, and the suspension of all bilateral trade. In response to India's diplomatic actions against Pakistan, Sharif suspended the 1972 Simla Agreement and suspended all trade with India. On 7 May, India launched Operation Sindoor, targeting nine sites in Azad Kashmir and Punjab. India claimed that the strikes were launched against "terrorist infrastructure" that they claimed were used by Jaish-e-Mohammed, Lashkar-e-Taiba, and Hizbul Mujahideen. On 10 May, Sharif presided over the launch of Operation Bunyan un-Marsoos in retaliation, overseeing a Pakistani air assault over 26 military sites across Western India, claiming heavy damage to Indian air bases, logistics hubs, storage facilities, and other military infrastructure. That same day, India and Pakistan agreed to a ceasefire to end the conflict. In the aftermath of the conflict, Sharif declared victory over India and designated 16 May as Youm-e-Tashakur ('Day of Gratitude') in honour of the Pakistani military, though the conflict produced no clear winner. In November 2025, the  U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission published its report on the conflict.  The Commission’s report noted that "Pakistan’s military success over India in its four-day clash showcased Chinese weaponry."

Sharif met with Bangladeshi Chief Adviser Muhammad Yunus in December 2024 during a Developing-8 summit in Cairo, the first meeting between Pakistani and Bangladeshi senior leaders since the July Revolution in Bangladesh. Sharif sought to bolster ties with Bangladesh, launching direct cargo shipments from Pakistan to Chittagong Port and offering 300 scholarships to Bangladeshi students.
Sharif expressed a desire to enhance relations with Afghanistan; however, he urged the Afghan government to crack down on the presence of militant groups such as the Pakistani Taliban (TTP), which operate out of Afghan territory against Pakistani security forces. In March 2024, Sharif authorized the Pakistan Air Force to launch airstrikes in Eastern Afghanistan to destroy TTP strongholds. He also continued the deportation of undocumented Afghans from Pakistan that first began under the Anwaar ul Haq Kakar caretaker government in December 2023. While addressing the eightieth session of the UNGA, Sharif publicly claimed that Pakistan faced problems from terrorist groups operating from "Afghan soil." In October 2025, Sharif oversaw Pakistani military operations against both the Afghan Taliban and the TTP as the Pakistani military struck Afghan border posts and cities, including Kabul and Kandahar.


== Public image ==

During his tenure as chief minister, Sharif developed a reputation as a diligent administrator. He initiated ambitious infrastructure projects in Punjab and was noted for his efficient governance. On 19 December 2016, Vice-Minister Zheng Xiaosong of the International Liaison Department of the Chinese Communist Party coined the term "Shehbaz Speed" to acknowledge his contributions to expediting the progress of projects within the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor. Subsequently, the term has been employed to characterize the rate of advancement within the CPEC. In official meetings, Saudi officials also declared Sharif the "Man of Action." In 2025, Sharif was recognized among the world's 500 most influential Muslims by The Muslim 500, an annual publication by the Royal Islamic Strategic Studies Centre in Amman, Jordan.


== Personal life ==


=== Family ===

 
Sharif married Nusrat Shehbaz in 1973. They had four children: Salman, Hamza, and twin daughters Javeria and Rabia.
His second marriage was to Aaliya Honey, whom he married in 1993. The couple separated after just one year.
In 2003, Sharif married his third wife, author and artist Tehmina Durrani.


=== Wealth ===
His family jointly owns Sharif Group and formerly owned Ittefaq Group. In 2013, it was noted that Shehbaz is wealthier than his elder brother Nawaz with a net worth of Rs. 33.69 crore.


=== Toshakhana records ===
On 12 March 2023, the Government of Pakistan released a record of Toshakhana gifts retained by government officials from 2003 to 2023, 90 gifts were retained by Sharif from Toshakhana.


== Controversies ==


=== Daily Mail defamation case ===
On 14 July 2019, the Daily Mail published a news with the headline: "Did the family of Pakistani politician who has become the poster boy for British overseas aid STEAL funds meant for earthquake victims?" According to the report, Shehbaz stole aid funds from the UK's Department for International Development (DFID) following the 2005 earthquake. It was written by Daily Mail journalist David Rose. Investigations have shown that the donated more than £500 million to the earthquake victims in Pakistan through the DFID, a UK government organisation.
David Rose claimed Shehbaz used the aid funds to send one million pounds through money laundering to his frontman Aftab Mehmood, a British citizen of Pakistani descent, who then gave the money to Shehbaz's family. Shehbaz and his family allegedly stole British citizens' tax relief funds, according to news reports. Salman Shehbaz, Shehbaz's son, refuted this information.
A DFID representative referred to the reports as "baseless" and "fabricated" on the organization's website, and in January 2020, Shehbaz filed a claim for damages against the Daily Mail and Rose in the Royal Court of Justice in London.
According to court documents, the Daily Mail took almost three years to submit a defence of Rose's story. On 20 April 2020, Justice Matthew Nicklin issued the initial order for the listing hearing window running from 21 April 2020 to 31 July 2020. On 7 May 2020, Justice Nicklin issued a second ruling that extended the due dates. On 20 October 2020, Justice Nicklin issued the first order, merging the claims of Shehbaz and his son-in-law Yousaf. On 28 January 2021, Justice Nicklin issued another order pertaining to the preliminary issue trial. The verdict and order were delivered on 5 February 2021. Justice Nicklin ruled at the meaning hearing at the London High Court in favour of the PML(N). Justice Nicklin determined that the Mail on Sunday's article carried the highest level of defamatory meaning for both Shehbaz and Yousaf.
On 18 February 2021, Justice Nicklin issued the directive with relation to certain deadlines. On 15 March 2022, the Daily Mail filed its defence. On 17 March 2022, Master Thornett issued the directive to file the defence. On 23 June and 20 September 2022, he then issued the orders to extend the deadline for filing the defence. Following negotiations to resolve the dispute after March 2022 between Daily Mail and Shehbaz, it was made apparent to his legal counsel that the publication would issue an apology and take down the item under his conditions. On 26 September 2022, Justice Nicklin issued an order and scheduled a joint case management meeting for 9 November. Three days prior to this hearing, Shehbaz pulled his request for a delay in favor of a full trial in a shrewd political move. According to the regulations, the court was not informed that the lawyers for Daily Mail had been secretly negotiating with Shehbaz's lawyers for several months, proposing to apologise. Shehbaz was persuaded by his legal staff that there was no use in submitting more paperwork as the paper had already agreed to apologise and remove the defamatory and misleading piece.
Daily Mail publishers and Shehbaz's lawyers signed an agreement of settlement with Tomlin Order in the second week of December 2022, after which Daily Mail removed the defamatory article and apologized to the prime minister and his son-in-law. The ANL promised that it will never propagate these false allegations at any forum, it has also worked with Google to remove all articles carrying Daily Mail's previous allegations.


=== United Nations speech (2025) ===
A political controversy emerged after columnist and social media activist Shama Junejo, perceived to be pro-Israel due to past social media posts on the Abraham Accords, claimed Prime Minister Shehbaz included her in Pakistan’s UN delegation as an adviser and tasked her with helping draft his “historic speech” for the eightieth session of the UNGA, which she said was the result of "teamwork." Junejo stated she had been part of the speech-writing team since April and joined the entourage from Britain, while the Foreign Office denied her official accreditation and said she was not part of the formally approved delegation.


== Books ==
Azm O Himmat Kī Dāstān (عزم و همت كى داستان; "A Tale of Resolve and Courage"), Lāhore: Sharīf Publīcations, 2000, 72 pp. History and struggle of business endeavours of the Sharif family.


== See also ==
List of current heads of state and government
List of international prime ministerial trips made by Shehbaz Sharif
Sharif family


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website