Steven Charles Witkoff (born March 15, 1957) is an American real estate developer, investor and founder of the Witkoff Group. Since 2025, Witkoff has served as the United States special envoy to the Middle East and special envoy for peace missions. He has also acted as a de facto envoy to Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Born in the Bronx and raised on Long Island, Witkoff earned a BA in political science and a JD from Hofstra University. After starting his career as a real estate attorney, he shifted to property development in New York and Miami. Witkoff acquired buildings in Manhattan, including the Daily News Building and the Woolworth Building. As of May 2025, Forbes estimated his net worth at US$2 billion.
During the first Trump administration, Witkoff was a member of the Great American Economic Revival Industry Groups, created to combat the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. 


== Early life and education ==
Witkoff was born in the Bronx in New York City, and raised in Baldwin Harbor and Old Westbury on Long Island. He is the son of Martin Witkoff and Lois née Birnbaum; Witkoff is Jewish. His father was the president of a women's clothing manufacturer named George Simonton Inc., and his mother was an interior designer.
Witkoff began his studies at Union College in Schenectady, New York, but he chose to transfer to Hofstra University, where he earned a BA in political science in 1980. In 1983, he graduated with a JD from Hofstra Law School. 
Witkoff's first job as a lawyer was with the firm, Dreyer & Traub in New York City. Trump was a client, and they met through work in 1986. They later developed a business relationship which evolved into a personal friendship.


== Private sector career ==
Witkoff began his career as a real estate lawyer. In November 2024, The Wall Street Journal reported that: "Peers in the real-estate world invariably describe Witkoff ... as smart, personable, and a talented negotiator with a common touch."


=== Stellar Management ===
In 1985, he co-founded Stellar Management, partnering with fellow Dreyer & Traub real estate attorney Larry Gluck—"Stellar" is derived from the names "Steve" and "Larry"—gradually switching their careers from the practice of law to owning and managing real estate. They purchased inexpensive apartment buildings in Washington Heights, Manhattan and the Northwest Bronx; at one point they owned 85 buildings with over 3,000 apartments. In 1995, he expanded into lower Manhattan, buying several inexpensive office buildings. In 1996, he secured financing from Credit Suisse First Boston for the purchase of 33 Maiden Lane, a 27-story tower designed by Philip Johnson and John Burgee; the following year, he leased the top 13 floors of the building to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for a 25-year term. Witkoff purchased additional properties including the landmark Daily News Building in the East Midtown neighborhood of Manhattan, designed by architects Raymond Hood and John Mead Howells.


=== Witkoff Group ===
In 1997, Witkoff left Stellar Management, founded and became chairman and CEO of the privately held Witkoff Group headquartered in New York City, and expanded into residential construction and land rehabilitation. In 1998, he and business partner Rubin Schron purchased the Woolworth Building in Tribeca for $138 million, and he expanded his portfolio to include real estate purchases in Chicago, Dallas, and Philadelphia. By October 1998, the Witkoff Group operated 11 million square feet of commercial and retail real estate, and held an ownership interest in 7,500 apartments and a number of land and hotel developments. In 1998, a planned $2 billion IPO of his company was canceled due to the collapse of the real estate market, and Witkoff and Gluck dissolved their partnership, with Gluck taking the residential properties and Witkoff the office buildings.
In 2013, Witkoff and Harry Macklowe purchased the Park Lane Hotel on Central Park South in Manhattan for $660 million. That year, Witkoff and Fisher Brothers also purchased a parcel of land in Tribeca in Manhattan for $223 million on which they built a 792-foot high residential tower, 111 Murray Street.
Over time, Witkoff diversified into higher-profile properties, including landmark buildings in Manhattan such as the Daily News Building and Woolworth Building.

As of 2019, the Witkoff Group owned about 50 properties in the United States and internationally.
The Witkoff Group purchased the project to build the resort and casino Fontainebleau Las Vegas for $600 million. The property was scheduled to open in 2020 as The Drew, named after Witkoff's late son Andrew. However, construction stopped in March 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Nevada. In February 2021, Koch Real Estate Investments purchased the property. The original name was reinstated, and the hotel opened in December 2023.
Also in 2023, Bloomberg reported that Witkoff helped revive the troubled One High Line condominium project in Manhattan, completing its transition to new ownership and development. That year, the Witkoff Group and Monroe Capital closed on a record-breaking loan for the redevelopment of the Shore Club Private Collection in Miami Beach.
In July 2025, Bloomberg reported that Witkoff sold a property on the Miami Beach waterfront for more than double its purchase price. In 2025, Witkoff partnered with Len Blavatnik and Barry Sternlicht on a stalled Miami Beach project.


==== First Donald Trump administration ====
Prior to and after his appointment as the second Donald Trump administration's envoy to the Middle East, Witkoff has had extensive business ties in the Middle East. 
During the first Donald Trump administration, the Qatari government was a key source of funds for the Witkoff Group. According to the New York Times, the Qatari government aimed to strengthen relationships with Trump confidantes, including Witkoff. At the time, the Witkoff Group was facing financial problems, making the Qatari financing important.


==== Second Donald Trump administration ====
After his 2025 appointment in the second Trump administration, Witkoff retained ownership in the Witkoff Group. When asked about these conflicts of interest in September 2025, a White House spokesperson said Witkoff was "finalizing" his divestment from the firm. In 2025, as Witkoff was engaged in high-stakes negotiations with Middle Eastern governments over a ceasefire in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, his son Alex was soliciting several of the same governments for billions of dollars of investment into his enterprises, raising conflicts of interest concerns.


== Political career ==
In April 2020, during the first presidency of Donald Trump, Witkoff had a minor role as a member of the Great American Economic Revival Industry Group, which was created by Trump to combat the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States.
In July 2024, Witkoff gave a speech on night four of the Republican National Convention.
On September 15, 2024, Witkoff was playing golf with Trump at Trump International Golf Club in West Palm Beach, Florida, when Ryan Wesley Routh attempted to assassinate Trump. A Secret Service officer fired at the gunman, who fled in a vehicle and was later apprehended.
On November 9, 2024, Witkoff was chosen to be co-chair of the Presidential Inaugural Committee for Trump's upcoming second presidency, along with former US Senator Kelly Loeffler.


=== Second Trump presidency ===
On November 12, 2024, President-elect Donald Trump announced that he had selected Witkoff to be his Special Envoy to the Middle East. Witkoff had limited formal diplomatic experience.
In 2025, during Trump's second term, he was appointed special envoy to the Middle East. Before formally taking office, he worked to help push negotiations that led to a ceasefire and hostage exchange between Israel and Hamas in January and October 2025.
While in office, he played a role in key geopolitical negotiations, including on issues unrelated to the Middle East, and was eventually appointed Special Envoy for Peace Missions on July 3, 2025.


==== Middle East ====
Witkoff played a key role in negotiating a ceasefire and hostage exchange between Israel and Hamas in January 2025, along with Brett McGurk, President Biden's lead negotiator who invited Witkoff to join the negotiations, and Qatari prime minister Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al Thani, who it was agreed would be the one who would speak to Hamas. There followed a six-week ceasefire agreement, during which there would be a swap of 33 Hamas-held hostages taken in the October 7 attacks for approximately 1,000 Palestinian prisoners, some of whom were serving life sentences for murder, and steps toward further exchanges and ending a prolonged 15-month war.

Witkoff's approach differed from traditional diplomatic methods, as he, joined by McGurk on speakerphone from Qatar, applied pressure on Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to finalize the deal, stressing that Trump wanted the deal done, achieving in the final weeks what had been in negotiation for nearly a year. The New York Times wrote: "It was a vivid example of cooperation between two men representing bitter political rivals. Rarely if ever have teams of current and new presidents of different parties worked together at such a high-stakes moment, with the fate of American lives and the future of a devastating war hanging in the balance."
On January 29, 2025, Witkoff arrived in Israel and made a rare entry by an American official into Gaza to personally oversee the ceasefire between Israel and Hamas.
On March 2, 2025, the Israeli government stopped the entry of goods and supplies into the Gaza Strip. The office of prime minister Netanyahu claimed they were acting upon a proposal Witkoff had originally presented. The new plan does not mention an Israeli retreat from positions in Gaza after half of the hostages have been released in phase one of the 2025 Gaza war ceasefire. The existence of a "Witkoff-plan" had not been confirmed by Washington as of March 3, 2025.

Instead of continuing to the second phase of the ceasefire per the original agreement, Israel proposed a new plan (called the "Witkoff plan" after Steve Witkoff), in which Hamas would release the Israeli captives in exchange for a 50-day extension of the ceasefire, with Israel retaining the option of returning to war. Hamas rejected this new proposal, which differed from the terms agreed in January 2025.
On March 23, 2025, Witkoff blamed Hamas for renewed fighting in Gaza, saying that "Hamas had every opportunity to demilitarize, to accept the bridging proposal that would have given us a 40- or 50-day ceasefire where we could have discussed demilitarization and a final truce."
In April 2025, Witkoff had an unannounced meeting in Paris with two Israeli officials ahead of the US-led nuclear talks with Iran. He represented the Trump administration's push for a diplomatic resolution. 

The first round of high level-meetings was held in Oman on April 12, 2025, led by Witkoff and Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi. Following the June 2025 Israeli strikes in Iran, diplomatic talks about nuclear energy between US and Iran were indefinitely suspended.
On June 1, 2025, the IDF killed at least 32 civilians and wounded over 200 at the aid center in Rafah. Pro-Palestinian social media accounts referred to the June 1 incident as the "Witkoff massacre", referring to Witkoff, who had endorsed Israel's plan to take over aid delivery in Gaza. On August 1, 2025, Witkoff and U.S. Ambassador to Israel Mike Huckabee visited the GHS distribution center in Gaza.


==== Negotiations with Russia ====

President Trump has made Witkoff his de facto envoy to Russian president Vladimir Putin. By March 2025, Witkoff had become the main channel of communication between the Trump administration and the Russian presidency. Lacking formal training in diplomacy, he conducted key meetings in ways that breached standard diplomatic protocol, raising concerns about the accuracy, trustworthiness, and effectiveness of such engagements.
On February 11, 2025, Trump sent Witkoff to Moscow, where he met with President Putin and was responsible for the negotiations that led to a prisoner swap and the release of U.S. citizen Marc Fogel from a Russian prison, in exchange for Russian citizen Alexander Vinnik. Witkoff said that Putin and Trump "had a great friendship, and I think now it's going to continue, and it's a really good thing for the world". Witkoff said he "spent a lot of time with Putin" during the secret trip and had developed a "friendship and relationship" with Putin.
On February 16, 2025, Witkoff rejected concerns that Ukraine and Europe would be excluded from any future peace negotiations in the Russian invasion of Ukraine. On February 18, American and Russian delegations, headed by U.S. Secretary of State Marco Rubio and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, respectively, met in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, to develop a framework for further peace negotiations. Rubio was accompanied by Steve Witkoff and former U.S. National Security Advisor Mike Waltz.
On March 21, 2025, in a podcast interview with Tucker Carlson, Witkoff said that the biggest issue in negotiations are the "so-called four regions: Donbas, Crimea, Lugansk . . . and there's two others". Russia occupied and annexed Crimea in 2014, then occupied and annexed four more Ukrainian provinces during its 2022 invasion. Donbas in not a Ukrainian region, but a collective name for the regions of Donetsk and Luhansk. He said that the populations in those provinces were Russian-speaking and "there were referendums where the vast majority of people indicated that they wanted to be under Russian rule". The polls had been held by Russia in the midst of its invasion and were condemned as a "sham" by the U.S., Ukraine and most of the international community.

In the interview, Witkoff spoke positively of Vladimir Putin. He called Putin a "great guy" and "super smart." Witkoff said, "I liked him, I think he was honest" and "I don't regard Putin as a bad guy". According to Witkoff, Putin told him that he prayed for "his friend" Donald Trump following the assassination attempt in Pennsylvania. He recalled that "President Putin had commissioned a beautiful portrait of President Trump, from the leading Russian artist, and actually gave it to me and asked me to take it home to President Trump". Ukraine's president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, said that Ukrainians were "very disturbed" by Witkoff's comments and believed he had been influenced by Russian disinformation. U.S. Democratic Representative Seth Moulton called Witkoff's comments "insane" and accused him of "negotiating for the other side" and "taking the side of our enemy." Journalist Stephen Pollard commented that Witkoff may mean well, but was embarrassingly out of his depth dealing with Putin.
In April 2025, Witkoff met with Putin in Moscow. Witkoff did not bring his own interpreter to the meetings, instead relying on Kremlin-provided translators. The decision was noted as a departure from standard diplomatic protocol, with former U.S. ambassador Michael McFaul commenting that “the language is never the same” when using only host-country interpreters.

In early August 2025, Witkoff traveled to Moscow for another round of talks with Putin. During the meeting, Witkoff reportedly misunderstood Putin’s remarks—interpreting a suggestion that he was open to a “peaceful withdrawal” of Ukrainian forces from occupied territories as an offer for Russian forces to withdraw from regions such as Kherson and Zaporizhzhia. This misinterpretation, conveyed back to Washington, seemingly prompted President Trump to pause new sanctions and extend an invitation to Putin for a summit in Alaska. Critics argue that Putin “was rewarded not with debilitating sanctions but with an invitation to meet,” reflecting the fallout from this diplomatic confusion.
The Alaska 2025 summit took place on August 15, 2025. Coverage of the meeting highlighted that the summit was marked more by symbolic pageantry, such as flyovers and photo-ops, than substantive progress, with Witkoff’s role reinforcing what critics saw as a spectacle of false diplomacy. Commentators further argued that entrusting such responsibilities to a real estate executive instead of trained diplomats not only compromised the talks but set a precedent for sidelining expertise in critical foreign policy negotiations.
On August 17, 2025, Witkoff claimed that, during the Alaska summit, Putin had promised to enshrine a non-aggression pledge in Russia’s constitution. His statements were dismissed as naïve and dangerously misguided, given Russia’s history of using constitutional amendments to consolidate power and justify territorial expansion rather than promote peace.
On November 19, 2025, Axios reported that Witkoff had drafted a 28-point U.S. peace plan with Russian envoy Kirill Dmitriev. The document called for significant Ukrainian concessions, including ceding territory, limiting the size of its armed forces, and renouncing NATO membership. The plan generated confusion and controversy, particularly regarding its authorship and its perceived alignment with Russian interests. Analysts noted that certain phrases in the English version appeared to reflect Russian syntax or translation artifacts, suggesting that the text may have been drafted originally in Russian before being translated into English. The plan includes provisions for using Russian state assets frozen in the EU to fund U.S.-led reconstruction efforts in Ukraine, with the United States receiving up to 50% of the investment profits; critics have accused the U.S. of war profiteering as a result. Western officials observed that the proposal might serve as a basis for negotiation but required substantial revision, citing its alignment with Russian demands. Several U.S. senators, including Mike Rounds and Angus King, stated that Secretary of State Marco Rubio had told them the plan “was not the administration’s plan” and resembled “a wish list of the Russians.” Rubio denied this characterization.  This episode has been cited as further evidence that the involvement of an inexperienced and unofficial negotiator like Witkoff introduced significant risks, raising concerns about the potential global implications of unauthorized diplomacy. Witkoff was criticized by diplomats and politicians alike for taking a pro Russian position in the 28-points and forwarding a plan which would divert substantial amounts of frozen Russian funds held in Europe by Belgium, from Ukraine to the USA.

On November 25, 2025, Bloomberg published a transcript of a 5-minute phone call on October 14, 2025 between Witkoff and Yuri Ushakov, Vladimir Putin's most senior foreign policy adviser. The transcript showed Witkoff giving Ushakov advice on negotiating with president Trump.
The leak led to condemnation of Witkoff among several members of congress, including Representative Ted Lieu, who wrote Witkoff was a "traitor" on X. Representative Don Bacon called for Witkoff's immediate dismissal, writing "For those who oppose the Russian invasion and want to see Ukraine prevail as a sovereign & democratic country, it is clear that Witkoff fully favors the Russians," on X, and Representative Brian Fitzpatrick wrote "This is a major problem. And one of the many reasons why these ridiculous side shows and secret meetings need to stop."
Trump later defended Witkoff's call, describing it as a "very standard form of negotiations".


== Views ==


=== Egypt ===

In March 2025, Witkoff expressed concern that Israel's war in Gaza could destabilize Middle Eastern countries such as Egypt and Saudi Arabia. He stated that the youth unemployment rate in Egypt is 45% and that the country is bankrupt, saying that "country can't exist like that. They're largely broke. They need a lot of help."


=== Syria ===
In March 2025, Witkoff suggested that Syria's new leader Ahmed al-Sharaa may have changed since his association with Al-Qaeda.


=== Israel and Palestine ===
In 2024, Witkoff criticized the Biden administration over its decision to halt the shipment of certain bombs to Israel. However, he also stated that Hamas members are "not as ideologically extreme as they are portrayed" and praised Qatar for its efforts in trying to negotiate an end to the Gaza conflict.
In March 2025, Witkoff said that Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, by renewing attacks on Gaza, was prioritizing the destruction of Hamas over the release of Israeli hostages.


=== Russia and Ukraine ===
In 2018, Witkoff opposed sanctions against Russia for its occupation of Crimea.
Witkoff has praised Russian president Putin and has appeared to support Russian government claims about its war against Ukraine. He said that Russia's invasion of Ukraine was "not necessarily" started by Russia, that NATO had a significant role in provoking the conflict, and that most Eastern Ukrainians want to live under Russian rule.
Witkoff said he is certain that Putin is not going to invade Europe and is not interested in the rest of Ukraine other than the annexed southeastern Ukraine.


=== Iran's nuclear program ===
Witkoff supported Trump's attempts to reach a diplomatic solution to Iran's nuclear program. He has stated that Iran should abandon its nuclear enrichment program as part of an agreement. As special envoy, he was the chief negotiator with Iran during the April–May 2025 talks.


== Personal life ==
Witkoff previously lived on the Upper East Side in Manhattan. In 1987, he married Lauren Jill Rappoport, who was then an associate at the Manhattan law firm of Botein, Hays & Sklar. They have three sons, Andrew, Zachary, and Alexander. In 2011, their 22-year-old son Andrew died of an OxyContin overdose at the now-closed Sunset Plaza Drive sober living facility in California. Their son Zach is a co-founder of World Liberty Financial, a cryptocurrency company. Their son Alexander is co-CEO of the Witkoff Group.
In 2019, Witkoff relocated from New York City to Florida and settled in Miami Beach. He separated from his wife, Jill, and has been in a relationship with Lauren Olaya since 2024; she often accompanies him.
The Witkoff family also own a farm in Lexington, Kentucky, which was reported to be the location for a fundraiser in October 2025 for Nate Morris alongside Vivek Ramaswamy.
In 2024, Bloomberg reported that Witkoff backed a $25 million expansion of Miami’s Institute of Contemporary Art. That year, he was appointed to the museum’s board of trustees. Witkoff has been on the executive committee for the Real Estate Board of New York and is a trustee for the Intrepid Foundation, and on the board of trustees of Hofstra University since 2015.


=== Advocacy ===
After the death of his son, Andrew, from an opioid overdose in 2011, Witkoff has become an advocate for addiction awareness and recovery efforts, addressing the issue in his speech at the 2024 Republican National Convention.


== References ==


== External links ==
Witkoff.com
"WATCH: Steve Witkoff speaks at 2024 Republican National Convention | 2024 RNC Night 4," PBS, July 18, 2024 (video).