Ziina (زينة) is a private fintech company based in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, founded in 2020. It offers digital payments services for consumers and businesses, including peer-to-peer transfers, payment links, QR and NFC (Tap to Pay) acceptance, and a payment gateway for SMEs. The company holds a Stored Value Facility (SVF) license issued by the Central Bank of the UAE.


== History ==
January 2020: Founded by Faisal Toukan, Sarah Toukan, Talal Toukan, and Andrew Gold
May 2020: App launched, secured $850K pre-seed round led by Class 5 Global
June 2021: Raised $7.5M seed round led by Avenir Growth Capital
March 2022: App Receives Red Dot Design Award, staying true to Ziina's Arabic name, which translates to "a thing of beauty"
August 2022: Introduces "ZiiBoard", a keyboard for generating payment links on social media.
December 2022: Appointed official payment partner for ComicCon Middle East.
May 2023: Introduced its payment gateway, enabling SMEs to accept online card payments via website integrations.
October 2023: Gateway capability expanded to accept up to 10 different     currencies and Arabic version of the app added. 
August 2024: First venture-backed company in the UAE to become licensed by The Central Bank of the UAE 
September 2024: Raised US $22 million in Series A funding led by Altos Ventures.
April 2025: Launched Tap to Pay on iPhone and Android, allowing merchants to accept contactless payments via smartphone.
July 2025: Entered partnership with Dubai CommerCity free zone to offer SMEs services such as instant transfers, payment links, NFC Tap to Pay, multi-currency virtual IBANs, and a co‑branded bank card.
October 2025: Partnered with Dubai's Meydan Freezone to become the payment provider of choice for member businesses.


== Products ==
Ziina is known for the following products and services available to businesses and consumers in the UAE:

Peer‑to‑peer wallet: Enables instant money transfers using mobile numbers, with no IBAN or SWIFT code necessary.
Payment links: Shareable links for use on social media and messaging platforms.
Payment gateway: Integrated checkout solutions for SMEs accepting cards online, supporting multiple currencies. 
In‑person acceptance: Tap to Pay on iPhone, Tap to Pay on Android, as well QR code payments. 
Multi‑currency settlement: Up to ten currencies supported on gateway transactions. 
Ziina Business Card (upcoming): A payment card integrated with the wallet for expense tracking & supplier payouts.
Other products include Invoicing features, multi-user access, custom API integrations, oath sign-in, and embedded checkout


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website