European cuisine (also known as Continental cuisine) comprises the cuisines originating from the various countries of Europe.
The cuisines of European countries are diverse, although some common characteristics distinguish them from those of other regions. Compared to traditional cooking of East Asia, meat holds a more prominent and substantial role in serving size. Many dairy products are utilised in cooking. There are hundreds of varieties of cheese and other fermented milk products. White wheat-flour bread has long been the prestige starch, but historically, most people ate bread, flatcakes, or porridge made from rye, spelt, barley, and oats. Those better off would also make pasta, dumplings and pastries. The potato has become a major starch plant in the diet of Europeans and their diaspora since the European colonisation of the Americas. Maize is much less common in most European diets than it is in the Americas; however, cornmeal (polenta or mămăligă) is a major part of the cuisines of Italy, the Balkans and the Caucasus. Although flatbreads (especially those with toppings, such as pizza or tarte flambée) and rice are eaten in Europe, they are only staple foods in limited areas, particularly in Southern Europe.  Salads—cold dishes with uncooked or cooked vegetables, sometimes with a dressing—are an integral part of European cuisine.
Formal European dinners are served in distinct courses. European presentation evolved from service à la française, or bringing multiple dishes to the table at once, into service à la russe, where dishes are presented sequentially. Usually, cold, hot and savoury, and sweet dishes are served strictly separately in this order, as hors d'oeuvre (appetizer) or soup, as entrée and main course, and as dessert. Dishes that are both sweet and savoury were common earlier in Ancient Roman cuisine, but are today uncommon, with sweet dishes usually being served only as dessert. A service where the guests are free to take food by themselves is termed a buffet, and is usually restricted to parties or holidays. 
Historically, European cuisine has been developed in the European royal and noble courts. European nobility was usually arms-bearing and lived in separate manors in the countryside. The knife was the primary eating implement (cutlery), and eating steaks and other foods that require cutting followed its adoption. This contrasted with East Asian cuisine, where the ruling class consisted of court officials, who had their food prepared in the kitchen, ready to be eaten with chopsticks. The knife was supplanted by the spoon for soups, while the fork was introduced later in the early modern period, in or around the 16th century. Today, most dishes are intended to be eaten with cutlery and only a few finger foods can be eaten with the hands in polite company.


== History ==


=== Medieval ===

In medieval times, a person's diet varied depending on their social class. However, cereal grains made up a significant part of a medieval person's diet, regardless of social class. Bread was common to both classes; it was eaten for lunch by working men, and thick slices of it were used as plates called trenchers. People of the noble class had access to finely ground flours for their breads and other baked goods. Noblemen were allowed to hunt for deer, boar, rabbits, birds, and other animals, giving them access to fresh meat and fish for their meals. Dishes for people of these classes were often heavily spiced. Spices at that time were very expensive, and the more spices used in dishes, the more wealth the person needed to purchase such ingredients. Common spices used were cinnamon, ginger, nutmeg, pepper, cumin, cloves, turmeric, anise, and saffron. Other ingredients used in dishes for the nobility and clergy included sugar, almonds and dried fruits like raisins. These imported ingredients would have been very expensive and nearly impossible for commoners to obtain. When banquets were held, the dishes served would be spectacular, another way for the noblemen to show how rich they were. Sugar sculptures would be placed on the tables as decoration and to eat, and foods would be dyed vibrant colors with imported spices.
Milan is home to the oldest restaurant in Italy and the second oldest in Europe, the Antica trattoria Bagutto, which has existed since at least 1284. The diet of a commoner would have been much simpler. Strict poaching laws prevented them from hunting, and if they did hunt and were caught, they could have parts of their limbs cut off or they could be killed. Much of the commoners' food would have been preserved in some way, such as through pickling or salting. Breads would have been made using rye or barley, and any vegetables would likely have been grown by the commoners themselves. Peasants would have likely been able to keep cows, and so would have access to milk, which then allowed them to make butter or cheese. When meat was eaten, it would have been beef, pork, or lamb. Commoners also ate pottage, a thick stew of vegetables, grains, and meat.


=== Early modern era ===

The cuisine of early modern Europe during the 16th through 19th centuries consisted of a mix of dishes inherited from medieval cuisine combined with innovations that persisted in the modern era.
The discovery of the New World, the establishment of new trade routes with Asia, and increased foreign influences from sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East meant that Europeans became familiarized with many new foodstuffs. Spices that had been prohibitively expensive luxuries, such as pepper, cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, and ginger, soon became available to the majority of the population, and the introduction of new plants from the New World and India like maize, potato, sweet potato, chili pepper, cocoa, vanilla, tomato, coffee, and tea transformed European cuisine.
Though there was a great influx of new ideas, an increase in foreign trade, and a Scientific Revolution, preservation of foods remained traditional: drying, salting, smoking, or pickling in vinegar. Fare was naturally dependent on the season; a cookbook by Domenico Romoli called Panunto made a virtue of necessity by including a recipe for each day of the year. Both doctors and chefs continued to characterize foodstuffs by their effects on the four humours: foods and beverages were considered to be heating or cooling, and moistening or drying, to the constitution.
Prosperity increased in Europe during this period, gradually reaching all classes and areas, and considerably changed the patterns of eating. Nationalism was first conceived in the early modern period, but it was not until the 19th century that the notion of a national cuisine emerged. Class differences were more important dividing lines, and it was almost always upper-class food that was described in recipe collections and cookbooks.


== Central European cuisines ==

Ashkenazi Jewish cuisine
 Austrian cuisine
 Viennese cuisine
 Czech cuisine
 Moravian cuisine
 German cuisine
 Baden cuisine
 Bavarian cuisine
 Berliner cuisine
 Brandenburg cuisine
 Franconian cuisine
 Hamburg cuisine
 Hessian cuisine
 Lower Saxon cuisine
 Mecklenburg cuisine
Palatine cuisine
 Pomeranian cuisine
 Saxon cuisine
Ore Mountain cuisine
 Schleswig-Holstein cuisine
Swabian cuisine
 Hungarian cuisine
 Liechtensteiner cuisine
 Polish cuisine
 Lublin cuisine
 Opole cuisine
 Podlaskie cuisine
 Silesian cuisine
 Świętokrzyskie cuisine
 Slovak cuisine
 Slovenian cuisine
 Swiss cuisine


== Eastern European cuisines ==

 Armenian cuisine
 Azerbaijani cuisine
 Belarusian cuisine
 Bulgarian cuisine
Cossack cuisine
 Georgian cuisine
 Kazakh cuisine
 Moldovan cuisine
 Gagauz cuisine
  Ossetian cuisine
 Romanian cuisine
 Transylvanian Saxon cuisine
 Russian cuisine
 Bashkir cuisine
 Chechen cuisine
 Circassian cuisine
 Kalmykian cuisine
 Komi cuisine
 Mordovian cuisine
 Tatar cuisine
 Udmurt cuisine
 Ukrainian cuisine
 Crimean Tatar cuisine
 Odesite cuisine


== Northern European cuisines ==
 British cuisine
  Channel Islands cuisine
 English cuisine
 Cornish cuisine
 Devonian cuisine
 Dorset cuisine
Victorian cuisine
Northern Irish cuisine
 Scottish cuisine
 Welsh cuisine
Cuisine of Carmarthenshire
Cuisine of Ceredigion
Cuisine of Gower
Cuisine of Monmouthshire
Cuisine of Pembrokeshire
Cuisine of the Vale of Glamorgan
 Danish cuisine
 Faroese cuisine
New Nordic Cuisine
 Estonian cuisine
 Finnish cuisine
 Icelandic cuisine
 Irish cuisine
 Latvian cuisine
 Lithuanian cuisine
 Livonian cuisine
 Norwegian cuisine
 Sami cuisine
 Swedish cuisine


== Southern European cuisines ==

 Albanian cuisine
 Aromanian cuisine
 Bosnian cuisine
 Croatian cuisine
 Cypriot cuisine
 Gibraltarian cuisine
 Greek cuisine
Ancient Greek cuisine
 Byzantine cuisine
 Cretan cuisine
Epirotic cuisine
 Greek Macedonian cuisine
 Ionian cuisine
 Italian cuisine
 Abruzzian cuisine
Ancient Roman cuisine
 Apulian cuisine
Arbëreshë cuisine
 Ligurian cuisine
 Lombard cuisine
 Mantuan cuisine
 Lucanian cuisine
 Neapolitan cuisine
 Piedmontese cuisine
 Roman cuisine
 Sardinian cuisine
 Sicilian cuisine
 Venetian cuisine
 Kosovar cuisine
 Macedonian cuisine
 Maltese cuisine
 Montenegrin cuisine
 Ottoman cuisine
 Portuguese cuisine
 Sammarinese cuisine
Sephardic Jewish cuisine
 Serbian cuisine
 Spanish cuisine
 Andalusian cuisine
 Aragonese cuisine
 Asturian cuisine
 Balearic cuisine
 Menorcan cuisine
 Basque cuisine
 Canarian cuisine
 Cantabrian cuisine
 Castilian-Leonese cuisine
 Vallisoletano cuisine
 Catalan cuisine
 Castilian-Manchego cuisine
Deconstructed cuisine
 Extremaduran cuisine
 Galician cuisine
 Madrilenian cuisine
 Valencian cuisine
 Turkish cuisine


== Western European cuisines ==
 Belgian cuisine
 Dutch cuisine
 French cuisine
 Corsican cuisine
Cuisine of Gascony
Haute cuisine
Cuisine classique
Nouvelle cuisine
Cuisine minceur
 Cuisine and specialties of Nord-Pas-de-Calais
 Lyonnaise cuisine
 Picardy cuisine
 Frisian cuisine
  Limburgian cuisine
 Luxembourgian cuisine
Mennonite cuisine
 Monégasque cuisine
 Occitan cuisine


== See also ==

Early modern European cuisine
Roman cuisine
Medieval cuisine
Romani cuisine
Soviet cuisine
Yoshoku


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Albala, Ken (2003). Food in Early Modern Europe. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 0313319626. Retrieved 6 June 2017.
R & R Publishing (2005). European Cuisine: The Best in European Food. Cpg Incorporated. ISBN 1740225279. Retrieved 6 June 2017.