Gawayn is a French-Italian-Canadian animated television series created and designed by Jan Van Rijsselberge. It is produced by Alphanim (previously known as Gaumont-Alphanim for the first season). The title of the show refers to King Arthur's nephew Gawain. The series had also been shown on the Starz Kids & Family cable network.


== Synopsis ==
William is an optimistic knight-in-training who lives in the mystical city of Camelot and is devoted to his mentor, knight in gleaming armour, Sir Roderick. The complication starts when the evil Duke of Amaraxos shrinks Princess Gwendolyn and takes over the kingdom, so the friends accompanied by Elspeth,William's sister and an apprentice sorceress, and Xiao Long, a young sage-in-training from distant Asia, set off on an adventure to undo the terrible curse by finding The Crystal of Gawayn.
In season 2, the Questers finally attain the Crystal of Gawayn which they were originally going to use to undue Princess Gwendolyn's curse. But thanks to Sir Roderick's impatience and clumsiness, he interrupts the process causing Gwen's size to be unstable. And to make matters worse, his clumsiness shatters the Crystal and they lose the Great Book of Magic which flies off after the failed spell. Now they return to life on the road with the goal of reclaiming the book and using it to find a way to repair the Crystal and finally put an end to the princess' curse for good.


== Characters ==
William  (voiced by Sonja Ball) – A knight-in-training of the Questers. He wants to be a knight and has made many current inventions. He's Elspeth's younger brother. He is 11 years old, and, despite his young age, is very intelligent, the brain of the group, and a master inventor. He is Sir Roderick's squire and apprentice.
Sir Roderick (voiced by Bruce Dinsmore) – A knight and boyfriend of Princess Gwen. He is very clumsy and often creates problems that put the team in unnecessary trouble and danger.
Princess Gwendolyn (voiced by Claudia Besso) – A deposed princess who has been reduced to the size of a doll by the Duke and Rex. Despite her size, she is capable of taking down opponents bigger than herself. In season 2, she was finally to be restored to her original size when they used the crystal, but Sir Roderick interrupted the process that caused it to be shattered, rendering her transformation unstable. Now depending on what emotions she feels, her size changes from small to big.
Elspeth (voiced by Emma Taylor-Isherwood) – A redhead apprentice magician. She wields the Great Book of Magic that the Duke used to shrink Gwendolyn which she now uses to help the team in their search for the Crystal. She is William's older sister, and they both speak with English accents. In season 2, due to Sir Roderick's idiocy, she botched the restoration process, not only making Gwen's size in constant flux but lost the Great Book of Magic which flew away. She is 10 years old, until Ferocious Fairies, and then is 11 years old for the rest of the show.
Xiao Long (voiced by Lucinda Davis) – A 10-year-old Chinese boy and the most gifted of the pack, is a martial arts expert and a sage-in-training. He can cook well. In the second series, it is revealed that the ghost of his grandfather was the one who gives clues to the team on where the Crystal of Gawayn is.
The Duke (voiced by Rick Jones) – The enemy of the team. It was he who shrunk Gwendolyn to usurp the throne from her. He is a failure. Even though he is angry, he can show his heart to his pet and cockroach friend Rex. Together with him, he watches the team on his personal viewing stone which he uses to thwart the Questers' efforts at every turn.
Rex (voiced by Richard Dumont) – The Duke's friend and pet; cockroach. He seems cruel, but he is kind at times and tries to console the Duke. He has known him since childhood. Even though Duke is a loser, he likes him because he looks after him and they spend time together.


== Episodes ==


=== Season 1 ===


=== Season 2 ===


== Production ==
The series was originally announced under the title "The Questers" in 2007. The first season of 52 13-minute episodes were produced by Alphanim and Mondo TV France.
A second season has also been produced.


== International broadcasts ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Gawayn at IMDb
Series profile at Gaumont Animation. Archived 20 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine