The Lviv Chronicle (Ukrainian: Львівський літопис) is a Ruthenian chronicle from Halychyna, written in the early 17th century.
This chronicle reflects the events in post-Kievan Rus' from year 1498 to 1649, revealing valuable information about the political and economic conditions of the Ukrainian lands, as well as their relations with other polities, such as Poland, Moscow, and the Crimean Khanate. It describes such events as the Crimean Tatar raids, imposition of Catholicism in Western Ukraine by Uniate clergy and nobility, the Ukrainian Cossack rebellion of the 1630s, and the Khmelnytsky Uprising (1648—1654). It mentions a number of unique stories from Ukrainian history that are not available from any other source.
The text of the Lviv Chronicle was discovered in the beginning of 19th century by the Western Ukrainian Russophile historian Denis Zubrytsky. The manuscript of the Chronicle was kept at the Stauropegion Institute and is now stored in the Central Scientific Library of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine in Kyiv, Ukraine.
It was first published in Moscow in 1839 by the Russian historian Mikhail Pogodin and later published in Lviv in the 1870s. The Etterov copy of the Lviv Chronicle (GPB F.IV.144) is stored in the Russian State Library.
The Lviv Chronicle is very similar to the Sofia Second Chronicle and the latter is thought to have been based on the former.


== See also ==
Rus' chronicle
Chroniclers of Volyn and Ukraine
Hustyn Chronicle
Mezhyhirya Chronicle
Ostroh Chronicler
Volyn Short Chronicle


== References ==


== Sources ==

(in Ukrainian) Гайдай Л. Історія України в особах, термінах, назвах і поняттях. — Луцьк: Вежа, 2000.
(in Ukrainian) Довідник з історії України. За ред. І. Підкови та Р. Шуста. — К.: Генеза, 1993.
(in Ukrainian) Bevzo, Oleksandr A. (1971). Львівський літопис і Острозький літописець: Джерелознавче дослідження [The Lviv Chronicle and the Ostroh Chronicler: A Source Study]. Kyiv: Naukova Dumka. The original text of the Lviv Chronicle in modern Ukrainian orthography.