The Agency for Defense Development (ADD, Korean: 국방과학연구소; Hanja: 國防科學硏究所; RR: Gukbang Gwahak Yeonguso) is the South Korean government agency for research and development in defense technology, funded by the Defense Acquisition Program Administration (DAPA). It was established in August 1970 under the banner of the self-reliant national defense promoted by President Park Chung Hee.
Its purpose is contributing to enforcing the national defence, to improving the national R&D capacity, and to fostering the domestic defense industry. ADD focuses on core weapons systems and core technology development, and studies major weapons platforms in high-risk and non-economical fields, unmanned and advanced, and new weapon systems for the future.
ADD is responsible for first South Korean ballistic missile Nike Hercules Korea-1 aka White/Polar Bear, developed in the 1970s with its first successful test in 1978.
ADD is the operator of South Korea's first dedicated military satellite, ANASIS-II, launched on 20 July 2020 by a Falcon 9 rocket.


== History ==

After the three-year Korean War, which ended in an armistice rather than an end-of-war agreement, South Korea and North Korea were in conflict during the Cold War. Since the Mutual Defense Treaty signed in October 1953, South Korea has been making efforts to rebuild its economy while receiving military aid from the United States. Despite military aid from the U.S. and abroad, in July 1954, Rhee Syng-man, then the first president of the South Korean government, established the Ministry of National Defense Scientific Research Institute to foster independent defense production capabilities, and the South Korean government's attempt to produce its own military supplies has contributed to the localization of military supplies such as military food, combat uniforms, and defense components that relied solely on foreign aid.
After the Nixon Doctrine announced on July 25, 1969, about 20,000 U.S. troops in South Korea withdrew, creating an atmosphere of reconciliation between the United States and the Eastern Bloc. President Park Chung-hee, who has been in power since December 1963, believed that the withdrawal of Nixon Doctrine and U.S. troops from South Korea would weaken the military power of South Korea, which relied on the U.S., and North Korea's military provocations against the South, which began in the late 1960s, surged further, and the South Korean government began to feel the need for self-reliant national defense, which did not rely on U.S. military aid. Later, in August 1970, the Agency for Defense Development was established, and in November of the following year, it started an independent defense development project called the Basic Weapon Emergency Prototype Development.
However, in the 1970s, South Korea had poor basic industries and systems to develop and stably produce military equipment. In 1973, the South Korean government designated heavy and chemical industries such as steel, machinery, chemicals, and Petroleum as national strategic industries to foster basic industries. Later, in February 1974, the eight-year military construction defense plan (군사력 건설 국방 8개년 계획), called Yulgok Project, began, which included plans to strengthen the South Korean military's power.


== Organization ==


=== Audit department ===
Director
Defense industry technology support center


==== Deputy director ====
Policy Planning Department
Research Planning Department
Academy of Defense Science and Technology
Ground Technology Research Institute
Maritime Technology Research Institute
Aerospace Technology Research Institute
Institute of Civil-Military Technology Cooperation
1st Research and Development Institute
2nd Research and Development Institute
3rd Research and Development Institute
4th Research and Development Institute
5th Research and Development Institute
Institute of Defense Advanced Technology Research
Defense Rapid Acquisition Technology Research Institute
Research Support Headquarters
Safety and Security Center


== Major research and development projects ==
Development programs for defense technology are categorized into basic research and development, key technology R&D, civil-military technology cooperation, and essential parts, software development and technology demonstration of new concepts. Almost all major development projects are collaborating with ADD and South Korean defense company, most of the key technologies are developed under the initiative of the ADD, and private defense companies are responsible for the development of the remaining sub-technology and the production of essential parts and finished products.


=== Infantry weapon ===
K1 selective-fire assault rifle
K2 assault rifle
K3 light machine gun
K4 automatic grenade launcher
K7 silenced submachine gun


=== Missile systems ===
Hycore hypersonic cruise missile system
Poniard (Bigung) 2.75-inch in diameter guided rocket system
K136 Kooryong 36 extended multiple rocket launcher system
Biryong (Flying Dragon) short range ship-to-ship guided weapon system based on K136
K239 Chunmoo self-propelled multiple rocket launcher system
AT-1K Raybolt (Hyeongung) medium range infantry missile system
LAH-AGM (Taipers) air-to-ground guided missile system
K745A1 Red Shark (Hongsangeo) anti-submarine missile system
SSM-700K C-Star (Haeseong-I) subsonic anti-ship cruise missile system
SSM-710K (Haeseong-II) enhanced cruise missile system
SSM-750K (Haeseong-III) enhanced cruise missile system
Korean supersonic anti-ship cruise missile system
Haeryong (Sea Dragon) tactical ship-launched land attack missile based on the Haeseong I
Ure (KTSSM) tactical surface-to-surface missile system
Hyunmoo ballistic missile system


=== Missile defense systems ===
KP-SAM (Chiron) manportable surface-to-air missile system
K-SAM (Pegasus) short-range surface-to-air missile system based on Crotale R440 missile system
M-SAM medium-range surface-to-air missile system based on technology from the 9M96 missile used on S-350E and S-400 missile systems
M-SAM Block-II enhanced medium-range surface-to-air missile system
K-SAAM (Haegung) short range ship-based surface-to-air missile system
L-SAM long-range multi-layered missile defense system


=== Ground weapon systems ===
KH178 105 mm towed howitzer
KH179 155 mm towed howitzer
K9 Thunder 155 mm self-propelled howitzer
K2 Black Panther main battle tank
K21 infantry fighting vehicle
K200 infantry fighting vehicle
K30 Biho self-propelled anti-aircraft guns
Korean Amphibious Assault Vehicle-II (KAAV-II)
Unmanned Surveillance Vehicle
K-NBC reconnaissance vehicle
High energy laser
KAPS hard-kill active protection system


=== Maritime and underwater weapon systems ===
Korean Vertical Launching System (K-VLS)
Harbor Underwater Surveillance System (HUSS)
Towed Array Sonar System (TASS)
Torpedo Acoustic Counter Measure (TACM)
Incheon-class frigate (FFG) sonar system
KDX-III batch-II (DDG) integrated sonar system
Jangbogo-III class (KSS-III) batch-I combat system
Jangbogo-III class (KSS-III) batch-I sonar system
Landing Platform Helicopter (LPH) combat system
Yoon Youngha-class patrol vessel (PKG) combat system
Ulsan-class frigate (FF) batch-I combat system
Ulsan-class frigate (FF) batch-III combat system
Dolgorae-class (Dolphin) midget submarine
Multi-Mission Unmanned Surface Vehicle (MMUSV)
Nobong 40 mm twin naval cannon developed in 1996 to replace the OTO Melara DARDO CIWS of the Republic of Korea Navy
K731 White Shark (Baek sang eo) heavy anti-submarine torpedo
K745 Blue Shark (Cheong sang eo) light anti-submarine torpedo
K761 Tiger Shark (Beom sang eo) heavy anti-submarine torpedo


=== Aircraft and UAV systems ===
KF-21 (Boramae) 4.5 generation fighter aircraft exploratory development
KUH-1 (Surion) medium transport helicopter mission equipment package
KT-1 (Woongbi) basic trainer
KA-1 tactical control aircraft
KGGB (Korean Guided GPS Bomb) precision guided glide bomb
RQ-101 (Songgolmae) corps level reconnaissance UAV
NCUAV next-generation reconnaissance UAV that is being jointly developed with Korea Aerospace Industries
KUS-FS multipurpose medium-altitude long-endurance unmanned aerial vehicle
LAH (Light Armed Helicopter) exploratory development
Graphite bomb


=== Surveillance and reconnaissance systems ===
Radar for land systems
KF-21 Active Electronically Scanned Array (AESA) radar
Ulsan-class frigate batch-I AESA Radar
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) for KUS-FS
Korean Commander's Panoramic Sight (KCPS) for K1A1
Korean Gunner's Primary Sight (KGPS) for K2 Black Panther
Sight system for K21 infantry fighting vehicle
Thermal Observation Device (TOD)
Electro-Optical Tracking System (EOTS) for PKG combat system
Infrared Search and Track (IRST) for shipborne systems
Forward-looking infrared (FLIR) system for KUH-1
Tactical Electro-Optical and Infrared reconnaissance system (Tac-EO/IR)
Electro-Optical and Infrared system for KUS-FS
Electro-Optical and Infrared system for NCUAV
Infrared camera for satellites
Multi-sensor and multi-source imagery fusion system


=== Command and control and information warfare systems ===
Tactical Information Communications Network (TICN)
Joint Tactical Data Link System (JTDLS)
Air Defense Command Control and Alert (ADC2A) system
Airborne ELINT pod system
Tactical communication electronic warfare (EW) system-II (TLQ-200K)
Airborne electronic countermeasure (ECM) pod system (ALQ-200)
Shipboard electronic warfare system (SLQ-200K)
Advanced SIGINT aircraft system


=== Space technologies ===
Reconnaissance space-based surveillance and reconnaissance system
Small satellite system
Military satellite communication system-I
Military satellite communication system-II


=== Core technologies ===
Seeker
Laser Detection and Ranging (LADAR)
Optical Phased Array-Based LADAR
Navigation technology
Micromachined inertial sensors
Fibre-Optic Gyroscope (FOG)
Hemispherical Resonator Gyroscope (HRG)
Control Moment Gyroscope (CMG)
Star tracker
Terrain Referenced Navigation
Ground-Based Radio System (GRNS)
Anti-jamming technology
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) Jamming
Rocket propulsion
Ramjet propulsion
Engine Technology (subsonic gas Turbine and high speed) for missiles and UAV
Defense materials
Fuel cells and special batteries
Underwater acoustic sensor
Hyperspectral image equipment
EMP (Electromagnetic Pulse) technology
Directional Infrared Countermeasure (DIRCM)
High Energy Material (HEM)
Ballistic protection technology
Precision-guided munition
Railgun
Dual barrel air-burst technology for XK13 25 mm OCSW, Cancelled in 2013.
Warrior platform
AI-based autonomy technology
Autonomous tunnel exploration robot
Rescue robot
Tailless demonstrator UAV for KUS-FC Unmanned combat aerial vehicle
Unmanned Combat Compound Rotorcraft (UCCR)
Anti-Submarine Warfare Unmanned Underwater Vehicle (ASWUUV)
Supercavitating torpedo
Cyber security technologies
Verification of chemical warfare agents
Detoxification technology


=== Future technologies ===
Artificial intelligence (AI)
Blockchain
Internet of Military Things (IoMT)
Quantum technology
Photonic radar technology
Atomic technology
Terahertz technology
Perovskite solar cell (PSC)
Self-generated electrostatic energy
Synthetic biology
Meta-material for stealth technology
Biomimetic robot
Swarming unmanned system technology
Boost phase interceptor
Counter long-range artillery interceptor system
Intelligent self-learning-based autonomous jamming
Centralized sequential kill-chain


== See also ==

Defense industry of South Korea
Solid-Fuel Space Launch Vehicle


== References ==

"Missile Systems". Agency for Defense Development. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022.
"Missile Defense Systems". Agency for Defense Development. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022.
"Ground Weapon Systems". Agency for Defense Development. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022.
"Maritime/Underwater Weapon Systems". Agency for Defense Development. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022.
"Aircraft and UAV Systems". Agency for Defense Development. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022.
"Surveillance and Reconnaissance Systems". Agency for Defense Development. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022.
"Command and Control/Information Warfare Systems". Agency for Defense Development. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022.
"Space Technologies". Agency for Defense Development. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022.
"Core Technologies". Agency for Defense Development. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022.
"Future Technologies". Agency for Defense Development. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022.


== External links ==