The Bangladesh Computer Council (BCC) is a statutory government organization operating under the Information and Communication Technology Division of the Ministry of Posts, Telecommunications, and Information Technology of the government of Bangladesh. Its headquarters are situated in Agargaon, Dhaka, Bangladesh. It was initially known as the National Computer Committee (NCC) in 1983 and transformed into the Bangladesh Computer Council through Act No. 9 of the National Parliament in 1990.
Since its inception, the BCC has been an important advocate for the country's technological development, specifically in information and communications technology (ICT). In collaboration with government organizations in Bangladesh, this organization is responsible for developing national ICT plans, strategies, and policies, empowering Digital Bangladesh, implementing e-government, and collaborating with various government organizations and private sector partners. They also set ICT standards and specifications, develop ICT infrastructure, provide advice on IT technology utilization and security measures, identify issues related to national cyber security and cybercrimes, and investigate, remediate, prevent, and suppress these issues.
The BCC has undertaken numerous projects to improve the country's ICT infrastructure, such as BanglaGovNet, Info-Sarker Phases II and III, Connected Bangladesh, and others, many of which have already been completed. It has also significantly contributed to human resource development by providing training to thousands of individuals, including the disabled, transgender and third-gender communities, and women entrepreneurs.
The BCC has been organizing various competitions and events to promote information technology education in the country, including the National Children and Youth Programming Contest, the International Blockchain Olympiad, and the International Collegiate Programming Contest. These events provide opportunities for people of all ages and backgrounds to showcase their skills and passion for this field, advance the country's startup ecosystem, and increase computer programming's popularity among the younger generation. In 2022, the BCC organized the 45th Annual International Collegiate Programming Contest World Final in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
The organization has received several awards and recognitions for its achievements in promoting ICT in Bangladesh, such as the WITSA award, WSIS Winner Prize, ASOCIO Digital Government Award, Open Group President Award, Public Administration Award 2017, etc.


== History ==
The government of Bangladesh established the National Computer Committee (NCC) in 1983. Nevertheless, the National Computer Board (NCB) took over the role of the NCC in 1988. In 1989, the "Bangladesh Computer Council Ordinance" was put into effect. The following year, the National Parliament enacted Act No. 9, "Bangladesh Computer Council Act, 1990", which transformed the National Computer Board into a statutory body under the name "Bangladesh Computer Council". BCC continued to function under the President's Secretariat until 1991. In 1991, this organization was placed under the Ministry of Science and Technology, which later became the Ministry of Science and Information and Communication Technology. 
Over the years, the BCC has evolved and expanded its scope of activities to meet the growing demands of the ICT sector. In 2011, the BCC was placed under the newly created Information and Communication Technology Division of the Ministry of Posts, Telecommunications and Information Technology of the government of Bangladesh (GoB).


== Objectives ==
The Bangladesh Computer Council operates with the following objectives to advance ICT in Bangladesh:

Setting and implementing national information technology policies, strategies, and plans for effective application and expansion of ICT in the country
Empower Digital Bangladesh.
Implement e-government.
Collaborate with the different government agencies and private sector partners to execute National ICT Plans.
Foster research and development in ICT.
Develop skilled human resources for IT-based industries.


== Responsibilities ==
The key responsibilities of the Bangladesh Computer Council include:

Encouraging the use of ICT for social and economic development
Developing the practical infrastructure for the use of computers in various sectors of the national economy and improving the quality of education, training, and professional standards related to computers
Helping Bangladeshi citizens become competitive in the field of information technology
Developing human resources and skills in computer technology and exporting these resources to the global market
Formulating and implementing national ICT strategies and policies
Cooperating with the government and other organizations in the use of ICT and providing them with advice
Promoting the use of ICT in government and other organizations
Providing advice on security measures for the use of ICT
Building training centers, libraries, and laboratories for computer science, providing the necessary equipment, and maintaining them
Collecting, analyzing, and disseminating information on ICT
Publishing reports, projects, and periodicals on computer science and ICT
Organizing discussions and workshops on computer science, ICT, and other related topics and conducting training on these topics
Providing grants for research, education, and training in ICT
Communicating and cooperating with all relevant government, private, domestic, and foreign organizations in the interest of achieving national goals in the field of ICT
Negotiating and signing contracts with domestic and foreign organizations with the prior approval of the government as necessary for the performance of the BCC's functions
Carrying out any special duties assigned by the government related to computer science
Defining the standards and specifications of computer science and ICT
Taking any necessary steps to perform the above-mentioned functions
These responsibilities encompass a wide range of initiatives and projects aimed at contributing to the development of the ICT sector in Bangladesh.


== Organizational structure ==
The BCC has a robust organizational structure that allows it to handle its wide range of responsibilities and initiatives efficiently. The Executive Director is the highest-ranking official and is responsible for overseeing all operations of this organization. Under the Executive Director, there are three primary Divisions, each headed by a Member, and each of these divisions further consists of several subdivisions, each overseen by a Director. The Technical Division handles technical matters such as data center operations, Certifying Authority activities, Object Identifier (OID) operations, and government-level ICT support services. The Policy, Strategy, and Development Division is responsible for formulating and overseeing information technology policies, strategies, and development efforts. The Capacity Development and Human Resources Division is in charge of capacity building and human resource functions for the ICT sector.


=== Regional offices ===
BCC has established seven regional offices in different parts of the country, which collaborate with local governments and non-governmental organizations to develop and implement national information and technology policies, strategies, and plans. These offices also assist in the implementation of e-government initiatives at the local level. Furthermore, They provide ICT training, develop ICT curricula, and support human development by hosting workshops, seminars, and online practice and e-learning activities in their respective regions with the collaboration of the local ICT industry. Regional offices of this organization:

Rajshahi office
Chattogram office
Khulna office
Sylhet office
Barishal office
Faridpur office and
Rangpur office.


=== BCC's Council Committee ===
The BCC's Council Committee is a group of 12 individuals from various government departments. The council is in charge of supervising and directing the council's operations. According to the information available, the members of the Council Committee are as follows:

Chairperson: The State Minister of the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology
Vice-Chairperson: Secretary of the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology
Member Secretary: Executive Director of Bangladesh Computer Council
Members: There are 7 members in the BCC's Council Committee.


== Activities and services ==


=== CA operation and security ===
BCC's CA Operations and Security serves as the sole official Certifying Authority of the government of Bangladesh. Its duties entail overseeing CA operations, enforcing regulations, and managing Electronic Signatures and a secure repository of electronic signature certificates. This guarantees a reliable infrastructure for secure electronic transactions and communications in Bangladesh while providing secure digital certificates, web-based SSL certificates, PKI tools, and e-signatures to government organizations.


=== Network Operations Center ===
The National Network Operation Center (NOC) was formed in 2014 to operate and maintain the e-government Network. It focuses on network security, planning, research and development, operation, upgrade, and maintenance of nationwide government networks. NOC provides internet, intranet, extranet, and government video conference networks for the President, Prime Minister, Ministries, Bangladesh Secretariat, and field administration. NOC provides consultation with other government organizations in preparing network standards and specifications. Currently, it is providing network operation and maintenance services in 18,834 government offices up to the upazila level. It also monitors the network connectivity of 2600 unions under the national priority project named ‘Info Sarker-3’.


=== Data center ===
BCC operates a Tier III-certified National Data Center in Bangladesh that offers a comprehensive range of services to government organizations. This data center provides secure and reliable cloud services and the storage and management of digital data for various government agencies and organizations in the country.
The National Data Center offers a range of Cloud computing services, including Elastic Cloud Server (ECS), Image Management Services (IMS), Elastic Volume Service (EVS) for Cloud Storage, Volume Backup Service (VBS), and Cloud Server Backup Service (CSBS) for Cloud Backup. In addition, it provides Virtual Private Cloud (VPC), Elastic IP (EIP), Elastic Load Balancer (ELB), and Virtual Firewall (VFW) for Cloud Network Services. Other services offered are virtual Private Servers, Load Balancing, Email Service, Web Hosting, Backup, and Colocation Services. A dedicated security team is in place to monitor and handle any security incidents that may arise.


=== Testing, Quality Control and Certification ===
This wing facilitates the testing (functional, performance, and security) of all software, applications, and mobile apps developed and procured by the government entity for e-government service delivery. It also conducts hardware testing, ensures quality assurance, and coordinates software certification.


=== Research and development ===
BCC is conducting research and development work on emerging technologies in the field of information technology. It formulates appropriate standards for implementing e-governance and software and hardware for capacity development, and it works on interoperability. It establishes and manages appropriate centers or systems to develop the innovative power of potential ICT graduates. It works on the development of IT personnel according to domestic and international markets and the commercialization of ICT.


=== Policy, strategy, and planning ===
BCC assists the government of Bangladesh in policy formulation, implementation, and monitoring. This organization coordinates with government institutions, conducts studies and surveys, and develops management information systems to address national needs.


=== ICT-related consultancy services ===
BCC provides ICT-related consultancy services to government and public organizations. These services include requirements analysis for hardware and software, technical specification preparation, requirement analysis for automation, tender document preparation, and tender evaluation for government organizations with e-government empowerment initiatives. Additionally, they provide on-demand websites and software development. Furthermore, BCC offers ICT professional recruitment assistance.


=== Condemnation service ===
BCC provides a crucial condemnation service for computers and related equipment, ensuring proper identification and removal of outdated, obsolete, or non-functional hardware for all government offices in Bangladesh. This service encourages responsible electronic waste disposal and the adoption of advanced technologies.


=== Object identifiers ===
BCC is the country Registration Authority (RA) for Object identifiers (OIDs). They received approval from the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) on July 30, 2012, to function as the country's RA. As the RA, this organization is responsible for allocating and managing OIDs within the country's OID allocation structure, which starts with country OID 2.16.50. The BCC oversees OID registration, ensures compliance, approves OIDs for the global repository, collaborates with ITU-T, defines valid objects, and assists OID users. As the country's RA, this organization facilitates a secure PKI and other IT initiatives.


=== BGD e-GOV CIRT ===
The Bangladesh e-government Computer Incident Response Team, also known as the National Computer Emergency Response Team of Bangladesh, is responsible for preventing and responding to cyber security threats within the country. They work closely with international partners to ensure the safety of Bangladesh's cyberspace. Their duties include receiving reviews, responding to computer security incidents, conducting research and development, and providing guidance on security threats and vulnerabilities. Additionally, they assist government organizations, financial organizations, law enforcement agencies, academia, and civil society in improving overall cyber security. They also provide the necessary support to the 'Digital Security Agency'.
BGD e-GOV CIRT offers a range of essential services, including incident handling, digital forensics, cyber security training, threat intelligence, IT audits, cyber sensors, risk assessment, and awareness building. These services help organizations identify and respond to security incidents, evaluate potential security gaps, and build awareness about the importance of cyber security.


=== Bangladesh National Digital Architecture ===
The government of Bangladesh has developed a National Enterprise architecture framework called the Bangladesh National Digital Architecture Framework based on leading standards, practices, and frameworks like Open Group's TOGAF 9. This framework has been customized to meet the specific requirements and strategic objectives of the country.
It consists of various key components that aim to establish the Bangladesh National Enterprise Architecture Framework. Such a component is the eGovernment Interoperability Framework, which ensures seamless integration and communication across different government departments and agencies. The Mobile Service Delivery Platform defines the architecture and standards for efficient mobile service delivery. The National e-Service Bus acts as a middleware application or platform, facilitating the integration of e-services.


=== Training and development ===
BCC offers various training courses and programs, as well as job fairs, workshops, seminars, and programming competitions nationwide. They also provide specialized training and events for disadvantaged communities, including the disabled and third-gender communities. Women entrepreneurs can also access various training opportunities.


=== Bangladesh Korea Institute of Information and Communication Technology (BKIICT) ===
To satisfy the rising demand in both the national and international job markets, BCC maintains an ICT training institute called BKIICT that provides a variety of ICT-related programs, including standard certification courses, diplomas, and post-graduate diplomas. The institute also provides customized courses for government officials to improve their ICT skills and efficiency. Besides, BKIICT conducts aptitude tests for ICT candidates applying for jobs in various government departments and organizations on behalf of those institutions. They also conduct computer proficiency tests and provide lab rental services according to government requirements.


=== Information-Technology Engineers Examination in Bangladesh ===
BCC's Bangladesh ICT-Engineers Examination Center, known as BD ITech, is responsible for the annual administration of the Information Technology Engineers Examination (ITEE) in Bangladesh. The ITEE is an internationally recognized information technology examination developed by Japan's Information Technology Promotion Agency (IPA). This exam applies to both IT and non-IT professionals and graduates, and their knowledge and skills in this field can get international recognition. Since 2013, BD-iTech has been entrusted by the Japanese government to conduct, implement, and certify ITEE exams in Bangladesh.


== Projects ==
BCC is conducting various national-level projects to improve the country's ICT infrastructure. Some such projects are: 


== Contributions ==


=== Human resource development ===
The BCC has made significant contributions to ICT human resource development. The BCC and its various projects have trained over 2,36,000 individuals, including 187,200 males and 46,800 females, in various ICT skills until April 3, 2023. Notably, from 2010 to 2022, BKIICT and 7 regional centers trained 36,000 individuals in diploma/PGD and short-term courses, preparing them for global employment opportunities. BCC has also empowered teachers and students, with 7,890 teachers trained as master trainers and 112,189 students receiving Basic ICT training. 
The council has provided training in emerging technologies like artificial intelligence (AI), the internet of things (IoT), blockchain, robotics, big data, medical scribe, and cyber security to government employees, educational institution teachers, entrepreneurs, and IT professionals. BCC has partnered with esteemed organizations such as Coursera, Facebook, and the National University of Singapore to enrich the training landscape in the country. Moreover, this organization has set up an assessment and certification platform to foster skilled manpower development and further fuel the growth of the IT industry in Bangladesh.


=== Infrastructure development ===
The Bangladesh Computer Council has been actively involved in the development of ICT infrastructure in Bangladesh to realize the Digital Bangladesh vision. Their projects have been instrumental in the implementation of Digital Bangladesh. One of their most significant contributions is the expansion of the ICT Tower (formally known as the BCC Tower) to accommodate various important institutions related to ICT. The building has been transformed into a "Center of Excellence" for all ICT-related government work.
The organization established Union Information and Service Centers (UISCs) through solar power in various unions without electricity, which were later renamed Union Digital Centers (UDCs). They have also established Digital Centers like UISC at various offices in different upazilas across the country. This organization has set up computer labs and smart classrooms in different educational institutions. They have also established cybercenters at various universities and colleges.
Moreover, BCC has set up the National Data Center (Tier III), providing uninterrupted services to various government offices. The Disaster Recovery Center located in Jessore has been established, along with the 7th largest National Data Center (Tier-IV) Center in the world at Bangabandhu Hi-Tech City, Kaliakair, Gazpur.
BCC has established a nationwide government network connectivity backbone under different projects, providing high-speed internet connections through optical fiber cable and the latest technology in video conferencing in several government offices across the country. Apart from this, the organization has set up Agricultural Information and Communication Centers and Telemedicine Centers. They have also established WiFi networks in the Bangladesh Secretariat and ICT Tower and virtual private network (VPN) connectivity in the Bangladesh Police. At present, the process of providing connectivity to the unions in remote areas is underway under the Connected Bangladesh project. BCC has connected India, Nepal, Bhutan, and Bangladesh by optical fiber cable to increase data exchange capacity. This organization has set up a 50-meter-high self-supported tower under the project entitled ‘Digital Island Moheskhali’ to introduce high-speed internet service. They have also set up an IP camera-based surveillance system to make Sylhet a "Safe City" under the "Digital Sylhet City" project.
BCC has an idea fab lab, a specialized network lab, a software and hardware quality testing lab, a digital forensic lab, a cyber range, and a cyber defense training center. These labs are facilitated with world-class, advanced devices and technology. In addition, this organization has deployed cyber-sensor technology on various critical information infrastructures.


=== Standards development ===
As information technology continues to advance, it is crucial to establish standards that can enhance the accessibility of the Bengali language in the field of information technology, ensuring its ease of use for everyone. The responsibility of promulgating these standards lies with the Bangladesh Standards and Testing Institution (BSTI), while the task of technical drafting and declaration is carried out by the BCC. The organization has already developed several standards and simultaneously modernized the existing ones. Bangladesh Standards are:

Bangladesh Standard Specification for Bangla Coded Character Set for Information Interchange (Third Revision) (BDS 1520:2018): It defines the character encoding scheme for the Bangla script, facilitating information exchange and compatibility across various computer systems and applications in Bangladesh. This specification ensures seamless communication and data sharing, promotes the development of localized software and content in the Bengali language, and ultimately enhances accessibility and inclusivity for the Bengali-speaking population in the digital realm.
Bangladesh Standard Specification for Computer Bangla Keyboard (First Revision) (BDS 1738:2018): This standard outlines the standardized requirements for keyboards specifically designed to input the Bengali script into computer systems. Introduced in 2018, this standard ensures uniformity and compatibility among computer Bengali keyboards, facilitating efficient and accurate typing of Bengali characters. BDS 1738 defines the layout, key arrangement, and functional characteristics of the keyboard, ensuring it meets the needs and preferences of Bangla language users in Bangladesh.
Bangladesh Standard Codes for Information Interchange or BSCII (BDS 1934:2018): To ensure compatibility and consistency in data exchange across various computer systems and applications within the country, there is a need for a national standard for ASCII-based Bengali character and symbol coding. The Bangladesh Computer Council has addressed this need by drafting the Bangladesh Standard Code for Information Interchange (BSCII). This code was created by reviewing popular Bengali language software based on ASCII in Bangladesh, and it includes a total of 210 Bengali letters, symbols, and compound letters. Its purpose is to define the character encoding system used for the interchange of information.
Due to lack of coherence and synergy between vendors and technologists, these standards were largely never widely accepted nor recognized by international bodies. Later, versions of standards such as BSCII in essence rubber stamped Unicode encoding scheme.
An official order to mandatorily install a keyboard layout package kit in 2018 spawned furor over multiple fronts.


== Notable events ==


=== National Children and Youth Programming Contest 2018 ===
The BCC organized the 'National Children and Youth Programming Contest 2018' to nurture the interest of children and adolescents in information technology education. Students from different schools across the nation participated in this competition, which concluded with an award ceremony at the BCC auditorium on 30 October 2018.


=== National Collegiate Programming Competition (NCPC) 2020 ===
On February 22, 2020, the National Collegiate Programming Competition (NCPC) organized by the BCC was held at the Military Institute of Science and Technology (MIST) in Dhaka, Bangladesh. Teams from different public and private universities took part in the event.


=== National ICT Competition 2020 for Persons with Disabilities ===
The BCC held the National ICT Competition for Youth with Disabilities on November 21, 2020, with different contestants from various regions. The competition was held at regional offices, including the head office in Dhaka.


=== iDEATHON ===
The BCC and South Korea organized the 'iDEATHON' contest to promote startup entrepreneurs in Bangladesh in 2020. The top 5 startups were awarded prestigious titles, and 10 entrepreneurs from the winning startups received a 6-month training program in South Korea, enhancing their expertise and capabilities. The competition aimed to advance the country's startup ecosystem.


=== Bangabandhu Innovation Grant 2021 ===
The iDEA project under the BCC organized the 'Bangabandhu Innovation Grant-2021' to encourage young entrepreneurs and startups in honor of the Golden Jubilee of Independence and Mujib Year. Startups and innovators from different countries, including Bangladesh, participated in the event. The winning startup is awarded a grant of USD 100,000.


=== Sheikh Russel Day 2021 ===
On the auspicious occasion of 'Sheikh Russell Day 2021,' the Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina inaugurated a distribution program for 600 laptops to 600 disabled persons trained in ICT by the "Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities (PWD) including NDD through ICT" project under the BCC.


=== Bangladesh Robot Olympiad 2021 ===
The fourth Bangladesh Robot Olympiad 2021 was organized in collaboration with the Information and Communication Technology Division, Dhaka University’s Department of Robotics and Mechanical Engineering, the Bangladesh Open Source Network, and the Bangladesh Computer Council.


=== International Blockchain Olympiad 2021 ===
The International Blockchain Olympiad (IBCOL) 2021, organized by the ICT Division of Bangladesh, Bangladesh Computer Council, Blockchain Olympiad Bangladesh, and Technohaven Company Limited, took place in Dhaka, Bangladesh, on October 8–10, 2021, coinciding with Bangladesh's Golden Jubilee of Independence.


=== Global IT Challenge 2021 for Youth with Disabilities ===
Despite the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, Bangladesh actively participated in the Global IT Challenge 2021 for Youth with Disabilities. The event, held online from South Korea, witnessed outstanding performances from four contestants representing Bangladesh, who were recognized with four prizes, including the esteemed Best Award (1st place).


=== Artificial Intelligence for Bangla’ Competition 2021 ===
The Artificial Intelligence for Bangla’ Competition 2021 aimed to encourage university students, researchers, and developers to explore the Bengali language and technology. The competition sparked enthusiasm and increased interest in working with Bengali language-related AI and information technology.


=== National High School Programming Competition 2021 ===
The National High School Programming Competition (NHSPC), organized by the BCC in 2021, encourages 6th–12th grade students in high schools, colleges, and madrasas to explore computer programming. The aim is to increase computer programming's popularity among young students.


=== National Girls Programming Competition (NGPC) 2021 ===
The 5th National Girls Programming Competition 2021 is jointly organized by the ICT Division, the Bangladesh Computer Council, and the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Daffodil International University. Female students from various universities across the country participated in this competition.


=== 45th Annual International Collegiate Programming Contest World Finals ===
The 45th Annual International Collegiate Programming Contest World Finals took place in Dhaka, Bangladesh, from November 6 to November 11, 2022. The event was organized in partnership with the ICT Division of Bangladesh, the ICPC Foundation, the Bangladesh Computer Council, and the University of Asia Pacific.


=== National High School Programming Contest 2022 ===
To motivate the students more in ICT and programming and to help them test their programming skills at a national level, the ICT Division of Bangladesh and Bangladesh Computer Council are jointly organizing the National High School Programming Contest 2022 with the slogan ‘জানুক সবাই দেখাও তুমি’.


== Awards ==


=== WITSA award ===
The Innovation Design and Entrepreneurship Academy (iDEA) Project of the BCC was runner-up in the Public-Private Partnership (PPP) category of the 2020 WITSA Global ICT Excellence Awards.


=== WSIS Winner Prize 2020 ===
In 2020, the e-recruitment platform of BCC received this award under the e-Employment category at the 9th annual WSIS Winner Prizes for Recruitment Process Management as a Shared Service for Government Agencies of Bangladesh.


=== WSIS Winner Prizes 2019 ===
In 2019, BCC won the WSIS Winner Prizes for the Establishment of Bangladesh National Digital Architecture (BNDA) and e-government Interoperability Framework (e-GIF).


=== WSIS Champion Prize 2019 ===
In 2019, BCC received the WSIS Champion Prize for the Development of National ICT Infra-Network for Bangladesh Government (Info-Sarker) Project.


=== ASOCIO 2018 Digital Government Award ===
The Info-Sarker Phase 3 project of the BCC has been recognized with the esteemed ICT sector award ASOCIO 2018 Digital Government Award by the Asian-Oceanian Computing Industry Organization (ASOCIO).


=== E-Asia 2017 Award ===
During the Asia Pacific Council for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business Summit 2017, the BCC's Info-Sarker Phase 3 initiative also won the E-Asia 2017 Award.


=== DCD APAC Award 2019 ===
The 4-Tier National Data Center (4TDC) Project of the BCC was awarded the DCD APAC Award 2019 in the Data Center Construction Category.


=== Open Group President Awards 2018 ===
The Bangladesh Computer Council received the 'Open Group President Awards 2018' in the category of innovation for their work in developing the Bangladesh National Enterprise Architecture (BNEA) and e-government Interoperability Framework (e-GIF). This achievement was recognized for its contribution to making government information and services interoperable, ultimately supporting the goal of establishing a "Digital Bangladesh" by the year 2021.


=== Open Group President Awards 2019 ===
The Bangladesh Computer Council has been awarded "The Open Group President's Award" in the category of "Architecture Enabled Government Transformation" for the e-recruitment system in 2019.


=== Public Administration Award 2017 ===
The Hon'ble Prime Minister presented the Public Administration Award 2017 to the Bangladesh Computer Council in recognition of their significant contribution to public service.


== References ==