Charles Russell (born May 9, 1958) is an American film director, screenwriter, and producer. He is best known for directing the films A Nightmare on Elm Street 3: Dream Warriors (1987), The Blob (1988), The Mask (1994), Eraser (1996), and The Scorpion King (2002).


== Career ==
Russell entered the film industry as a production manager and assistant director on independent films, while writing screenplays. During the production of the film Hell Night, he met writer Frank Darabont, with whom he would become a close collaborator. His first produced script was the 1984 film Dreamscape, directed by Joseph Ruben and starring Dennis Quaid.
Russell made his directorial debut in 1987 with A Nightmare on Elm Street 3: Dream Warriors. At that time, New Line Cinema was uncertain about the future of the Elm Street franchise. Russell convinced them that the series could take a step further into Freddy's nightmare world through advanced visual effects and dramatize the bond among Freddy's youthful victims with the concept of Dream Warriors. The success of the film redefined the franchise for New Line, earning more at the box office than the first two films put together.
Russell went on to write and direct the cult horror film The Blob in 1988, once again stretching the boundaries of visual effects on a limited budget. He then found international acclaim with the blockbuster The Mask about a bank clerk who discovers an ancient mask that transforms him into a malicious prankster who uses practical jokes to fight crime. Russell created groundbreaking digital technologies for The Mask with George Lucas's Industrial Light and Magic, combining live action performance with radically new concepts in visual effects. Russell's work earned the film an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects. The Mask also created international stardom for both Jim Carrey and Cameron Diaz. With a production budget of $18 million, The Mask earned more than $350 million in worldwide box office.
Russell then went on to direct the action films Eraser with Arnold Schwarzenegger, which grossed over $240 million internationally, and The Scorpion King, which was the first leading role for WWE star Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson. Both films were #1 box office hits upon their release.
Russell was originally attached to direct the 2004 film Collateral, though ultimately the production was passed onto Michael Mann. Russell retained an executive producer credit, while Darabont was an uncredited script doctor.
After a fourteen year hiatus from directing (save for a 2010 episode of the television series Fringe), Russell's next film was 2016's I Am Wrath starring John Travolta. In 2019, he directed Junglee, an Indian action-adventure film that released on March 29, 2019. For Junglee, the 60-year-old director worked with elephants and the song-and-dance tradition unique to Indian cinema for the first time. Both were inspiring, he told Scroll.in during a recent visit to Mumbai.
In 2022, Russell directed Paradise City, starring Bruce Willis and Travolta.
In 2024, Russell wrote and directed a remake of the 1986 film Witchboard.
Russell is the co-founder of A-Nation, a film production company utilizing blockchain technology.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===

Producer only


=== Television ===


== References ==


== External links ==

Chuck Russell at IMDb