David Huang (born 1964) is a Taiwanese‑American
 ophthalmologist, biomedical engineer, and inventor best known for co‑inventing optical coherence tomography (OCT), an imaging modality widely used in ophthalmology and cardiology.

He is the Wold Family Chair in Ophthalmic Imaging at the Casey Eye Institute of Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU) and directs the Center for Ophthalmic Optics & Lasers (COOL Lab).


== Biography ==


=== Early life and education ===
Huang was born in 1964 in Chiayi, Taiwan. As a teenager, he immigrated to the United States and attended high school in Avoca, New York. He earned a BS in electrical engineering from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1985 and an MS in 1989, then completed MD and PhD degrees through the Harvard–MIT Health Sciences and Technology program in 1993.


=== Career ===
Huang completed his medical internship at Mercy Hospital in San Diego in 1994, before moving to the University of Southern California to complete his ophthalmology residency in 1997. Huang completed his cornea, external diseases, and refractive surgery fellowship at Emory University in 1998. Following this, he worked in the Cleveland Clinic until 2004 as an associative staff in refractive surgery, cornea, and biomedical engineering. Huang then took on a role as Associate Professor of Ophthalmology and Biomedical Engineering at USC and Medical Director of the Doheny Laser Vision Center until 2010.
David Huang is a board-certified ophthalmologist and currently the Director of Research and Associate Director of the Casey Eye Institute of the Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU). He is also the director of the Center for Ophthalmic Optics & Lasers, a research group that works on novel OCT imaging and laser therapeutic technologies for clinical applications. He is the Wold Family Chair in Ophthalmologic Imaging and a professor of ophthalmology and biomedical engineering at the OHSU School of Medicine.
Huang is an inventor and holds 44 U.S. patents in the areas of OCT, OCT angiography, laser therapeutics, tissue engineering, and smartphone eye screening.
Huang co-founded two companies. GoCheck Kids provides smartphone apps that screen young children for potential vision and hearing problems.

 Unfold Therapeutics, Inc. develops laser surgical devices.


== Research ==


=== Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT) ===
Optical coherence tomography is an imaging technique that Huang co-invented in collaboration with Eric Swanson and Dr. James Fujimoto, his PhD advisor, resulting in the publication of the article 'Optical Coherence Tomography' in 1991 in Science. This publication focused on the imaging potential for very small structures, specifically the retina and coronary artery plaque, due to its micrometer depth resolution. OCT utilizes light to view subsurface structures in the body. This has led to its application in many different medical fields. Usage of OCT is now considered standard of care within the clinical specialties of ophthalmology and cardiology
Since the invention of OCT, Huang has worked to help further develop the technology and its clinical applications. He has contributed to the extensions of OCT technology such as polarization-sensitive OCT, corneal and anterior segment OCT, Doppler OCT, OCT angiography, and OCT optoretinography. His research group has applied these technologies to the diagnosis and management of retinal, optic nerve, and anterior segment diseases in the eye, as well as ocular manifestations of neurological diseases. He has published over 350 articles in peer-reviewed scientific journals that have been cited over 66,000 times (H-index 100. He is a co-founder and president emeritus of the International Ocular Circulation Society


== Awards and honors ==
2012 Champalimaud Vision Award
2013 Jonas Friedenwald Award, Association for Research in Vision & Ophthalmology
2017 Fritz J. and Dolores H. Russ prize
2023 Induction to National Academy of Engineering
2023 Lasker-DeBakey Clinical Medical Research Award
2023 National Medal of Technology and Innovation
2024 Induction to National Academy of Medicine
2024 Oregon History Maker, Oregon Historical Society
2025 Induction to the National Inventors Hall of Fame


== References ==


== External links ==
Center for Ophthalmic Optics & Lasers (COOL Lab) – OHSU
National Inventors Hall of Fame profile
"Unexplored Territories: James Fujimoto, David Huang, and Eric Swanson" – NIHF video (2025)
"Seeing Small & Aiming Big" – Lasker–APSA Lecture with video (2024)
"Oregon History Makers: Dr. David Huang" – KGW feature (2024)