David Gordon (born April 7, 1948) is an American libertarian philosopher and intellectual historian influenced by Murray Rothbard's views of economics. He is a senior fellow of the Ludwig von Mises Institute, a libertarian think tank, and is the editor of The Mises Reviews.


== Education ==
Gordon received his degrees from the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), including a doctorate in intellectual history.


== Career ==

Gordon is a senior fellow of the Mises Institute, a libertarian think tank. He previously worked for another libertarian think tank, the Cato Institute, from 1979 to 1980. He has written for the Rothbard-Rockwell Report published by Murray Rothbard and Lew Rockwell. He became a specialist in Rothbard's works on political theory, history, economics, and other subjects.
He has contributed to Analysis, International Philosophical Quarterly, The Journal of Libertarian Studies, The Quarterly Journal of Austrian Economics, Social Philosophy and Policy and Econ Journal Watch. He also has been published in the Orange County Register, The American Conservative and The Freeman.
In 1985 Gordon worked with Walter Block on a law review article, "Extortion and the Exercise of Free Speech Rights," which explored contradictions and paradoxes in laws against blackmail and the conditions under which such laws may be acceptable.
Gordon's 1991 book Resurrecting Marx: The Analytical Marxists on Freedom, Exploitation, and Justice was described by Mises Institute scholar Yuri Maltsev as "a refutation of neo-Marxist attempts to save the system from itself." The book, which answers the arguments of Marxist political philosophers, including G. A. Cohen, Jon Elster, and John Roemer, dismisses every form of Marxism as theoretically unviable. The American Political Science Review said Gordon's argument was "rather crude": capitalism could not be exploitative, and laissez-faire capitalism could serve a just world. Therefore, Gordon concludes, Marxism is "a complete failure." Contemporary Sociology said Gordon failed to show that analytical Marxists were "a formidable weapon in the hands of anti-Marxists" such as himself. Gordon was said to have shown little competency in anti-Marxist argument, falling into "easily avoided mistakes." Paul Gottfried in The Review of Metaphysics assessed the book more positively, writing that Gordon had demonstrated that Cohen, Elster and Roemer had failed to "rehabilitate Marx's economic theories". The review said Gordon's explanation of his own libertarian stance was "by far the most stimulating." Oxford political scientist David Leopold noted Gordon's thumbnail test regarding whether a writer could be classified as an analytical Marxist as part of a common "misleading and unfortunate" understanding of the school, Gordon writing that a favorable stance on dialectics meant that the writer must be "crossed off the list."
Gordon's book The Philosophical Origins of Austrian Economics (1992), which explores the philosophical origins of Carl Menger's economic theories, was highly praised by Murray Rothbard. Writing in The Review of Austrian Economics, Barry Smith criticized the book for its over-simplistic division of philosophers into two camps—German (Hegelian, organicist and anti-science) and Austrian (Aristotelian, individualist and pro-science)—despite philosophers having more complex interrelations. For instance, Franz Brentano is exemplary of Austrian thought though he was born in Germany and was strongly influenced by German philosopher Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg. Gordon later wrote an essay, "Second Thoughts on The Philosophical Origins of Austrian Economics," to provide some additions and corrections to his book.
In 2002, Gordon edited Secession, State & Liberty, a collection of essays arguing that secession should be seriously considered. The essays analyze U.S. history, examine theoretical issues, and apply these ideas to the modern world.
In 2011, Gordon and Swedish consultant Per Nilsson analyzed books published by Harvard University Press in their paper "The Ideological Profile of Harvard University Press: Categorizing 494 Books Published 2000–2010" in Econ Journal Watch. They concluded that the press's ideology is predominantly leftist, although they acknowledged they hadn't read all the books they categorized.


== Assessments ==

Murray Rothbard referred to Gordon as a friend and "Mr. Erudition." In The Myth of National Defense, Luigi Marco Bassani and Carlo Lottieri described Gordon as the "semiofficial reviewer of the libertarian community." Reason journalist Brian Doherty wrote in the foreword to Strictly Confidential: The Private Volker Fund Memos of Murray N. Rothbard that Gordon was "the only man around who knows as much as Rothbard did about the historical, philosophical, and economic background of libertarianism." The Orange County Register called him a "polymath."
Peter J. Boettke, in Reason Papers (Fall 1994), described Gordon as a philosopher and intellectual historian deeply influenced by Rothbardian economics.


== Books ==
Resurrecting Marx: The Analytical Marxists on Freedom, Exploitation, and Justice. Transaction Publishers. 1991. ISBN 978-0-88738-390-8.
Editor, with Jeremy Shearmur. H. B. Acton's The Morals of Markets and Related Essays, (1971) essays. 2nd edition (1993), Liberty Fund, ISBN 978-0-86597-106-6.
The Philosophical Origins of Austrian Economics. Mises Institute. 1996. ISBN 978-0-945466-14-7.
An Introduction to Economic Reasoning (ebook version) (PDF). Mises Institute. 2000. ISBN 978-0-945466-28-4.
Editor, Secession, State & Liberty. Transaction Publishers. 2002. ISBN 978-0-7658-0943-8.
The Essential Rothbard. Mises Institute. 2007. ISBN 978-1-933550-10-7.


== References ==


== External links ==
David Gordon archives at LewRockwell.com
2010 Mises Faculty Spotlight: Text Interview with David Gordon
2012 Bad Quaker Podcast: Audio Interview with David Gordon