Freename, also known as Freename AG, is a domain registrar based in Zurich, Switzerland.It was founded by Davide Vicini and Mattia Martone in 2021 and is the first Web3 namespace to receive ICANN accreditation, as well as the first on-chain Web3 DNS to be readable by standard browser. It is also provides a resolution protocol that connects with both Web2 and Web3 domain registries.


== History ==
Freename was founded in 2021 in Wollerau, Kanton Schwyz. At the time of its founding, it only offered Web3 solutions, including a naming platform that let people create blockchain-based TLDs.
In 2024, Freename launched the service NOTO, in close beta, which crawls blockchain naming systems to compile lists of domain names and to allow internet service providers, such as browsers and wallets, to resolve Web3 domains in a safe and interoperable way.
Also in 2024, Freename became the first Web3 namespace to be accredited by ICANN, enabling it to offer traditional domain names alongside decentralized ones.
In 2025, Freename published the first issue of its quarterly industry publication, The Domain Standard.
Freename’s patent for an Internet protocol that integrates with major blockchains and Web2 and Web3 domain registries was also published in 2025.The patent includes both the protocol and a management platform that allows users to customize how domains are handled.


== Services ==
Freename allows users to register and manage their own Web3 Top Level Domains (TLDs) and Second Level Domains (SLDs). Freename also utilizes a collision management system to resolve identical domain names across blockchains and Web3 registrars.
The platform uses proprietary technology for blockchain mirroring between Web2 domains and their on-chain identities, enabling Web3 use cases such as wallet resolution and crypto payments on tokenized Web2 domains.
Freename domains can be monetized and trademarked. The platform also enables second-level domain sales.
The platform uses DNS technology that is compatible with blockchain networks such as Polygon, Solana, Base, Chiliz, and BNB Chain, as well as browsers such as Google Chrome and Safari.
Freename’s domains can be used to send and receive crypto payments, send Web2 and Web3 emails, and build decentralized websites. Crypto wallets such as MetaMask can be linked to domains.
Freename also provides fractionalized domain access through its subsidiary, Domora.


== References ==