Information Kerala Mission [1] (IKM), is an Autonomous Institution under Local self government Department, Government of Kerala, for computerisation and networking of local governments in Kerala (India) and has been in existence for a decade since August 1999.


== Basic objective ==
The basic objective of IKM is to provide vibrant Information technology e-governance to  the local governments in Kerala.IKM attempts to strengthen local self-governance or third tier governance and development through ICT (Information and Communications Technology) applications. It envisages computerising and networking the 1223 local self-government institutions (LSGIs) in Kerala. It is the largest and most comprehensive local government computerisation project in India. It addresses the entire gamut of issues concerning local governance, decentralised planning, and local economic development.
Executive Director Of IKM- Seeram Sambasiva Rao IAS


== Phased implementation ==
IKM envisages a phased transformation of the existing systems to electronic systems. It has developed methodologies that suit this purpose. IKM has adopted a human-centred approach to e-governance. This approach is characterised by the holistic and proactive evaluation of existing systems and legacy systems, attempts to simplify and transform existing systems and effecting integration of systems. Systematic attempts at process reforms are also part of it. These would enable faster and objective decision-making, more citizen-friendly interfaces and better accountability.
IKM Methodology places the employees and functionaries at the central stage of this transformation and focuses on their empowerment and capacity building as the mechanism for improving performance. The software applications are developed through active user participation. Emphasis is placed on demystification of technologies and establishing adequate technical support systems. Training and hand holding are given high priority. IKM has taken out extensive pilot deployment of its application suites.


== Application Software ==
Sulekha 	: 	Plan Monitoring for decentralised planning at local level
Sevana 	: 	Civil Registration - Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration
Sanchitha	: 	Repository of acts and rules relating to local bodies
Soochika 	: 	Work flow application. Status Monitoring over web, and eSMS integration
Sanchaya 	: 	The Revenue & Licence System
Saankhya 	: 	Double entry accrual based accounting for all local governments
Sthapana 	: 	Payroll, PF accounting (Municipal and Panchayat employees PF accounts)
Samvedhitha 	: 	LSGD web portal for all local governments and the Department
Sachithra 	: 	Map suite (GIS) and asset register for local governments
Sevana Pension 	: 	Disbursement of social welfare pensions, with electronic money order (eMO) integration
Sakarma 	: 	Handling of council/committee agenda, minutes, etc.
Sugama 	: 	Cost Estimation tool for public works
Sanketham 	: 	Ensures transparency in granting Building Permits (KMBR)
Subhadra 	: 	Financial Management System
Samoohya 	: 	Citizen database
Saphalya 	: 	Human resource package


== Online Services ==
Birth & Death Registration
Marriage Registration & efiling
Plan Monitoring
LSGD Portal
Property Tax & epayment Archived 21 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine
Social Security Pension
GIS Maps Archived 18 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine
Double Entry Accounting
File Tracking
Building Permit
Municipality Employees PF
Panchayat Employees PF
Legal Advisor


== Awards ==
Sulekha (Plan Formulation and Monitoring System for Decentralised Planning of Local Governments) won the Gold Medal in National Awards or e-governance 2009-10 by Government of India for under the category "Excellence in Government Process Re-engineering". Sevana (Civil Registration System and Hospital Kiosks) won Brownze medal under the category "Outstanding performance in Citizen-Centric Service Delivery"
CSI Nihilent e-governance Awards 2008-09 for Sulekha Plan Monitoring System for Decentralised Planning, Kerala


== See also ==
Local Governance in Kerala
Kerala State IT Mission
Local eGovernment
My Gov


== References ==


== External links ==
Website of Information Kerala Mission
Information Kerala Mission : Vision, Mission and Reality, A study commissioned by FSF
A Response of Professionals in Information Kerala Mission to the points raised in the study commissioned by the Free Software Foundation
Websites created  by IKM for Municipalities in Kerala
Website of Local Self Government Department, Government of Kerala
Website on Decentralisation and Local Governance in Kerala