John Oluseun Dabiri is an American engineer and professor at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech), where he holds posts in aerospace engineering and mechanical engineering. His academic research focuses on unsteady fluid mechanics and flow physics with applications in biology, renewable energy, and the environment.
Dabiri studies biological fluid dynamics, including investigations of jellyfish propulsion. He has also designed a vertical-axis wind turbine system mimicking the movement patterns of schools of fish to enhance the efficiency of wind energy.


== Early life and education ==
Dabiri's parents are Nigerian immigrants who settled in Toledo, Ohio, in 1975. Dabiri was born in 1980. During his childhood, Dabiri was exposed to engineering concepts through his father's technical work. Dabiri attended a small Baptist high school, receiving his undergraduate degree.
Dabiri graduated from Princeton University in 2001 with a B.S.E. degree in mechanical and aerospace engineering. His senior thesis was entitled An Investigation of Small-Scale Rotor Blade Aerodynamic Phenomena Using Particle Image Velocimetry and Computational Models. Dabiri then went to Caltech for graduate studies. Graduating with a Master of Science degree in Aeronautics in 2003 and his Ph.D. in Bioengineering with a minor in Aeronautics in 2005.


== Career ==
From 2005 to 2009, Dabiri was an assistant professor at Caltech in aeronautics and biological engineering. He received tenure in 2009  and was promoted to full professor in 2010. From 2013 to 2014, he served as chair of the Faculty Board. During the following school year, he was the Dean of Undergraduate Students. In 2015, Dabiri went to Stanford University to become a professor in civil, environmental, and mechanical engineering. There he was also a senior fellow in Stanford's Center for Turbulence Research and founding director of the Catalyst for Collaborative Solutions initiative. In 2019, he returned to Caltech as the Centennial Chair Professor in aeronautics and mechanical engineering. Dabiri served on the President’s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST) from 2021 to January 2025.
Dabiri serves on the Board of Directors of NVIDIA Corporation, the Board of Trustees of the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, and the United States Secretary of Energy Advisory Board (SEAB), and as an advisor to X at Alphabet Inc. (formerly Google X). Additionally, he was the chair of the American Physical Society Division of Fluid Dynamics, and a member of the National Academies' Committee on Science, Technology, and Law. He served on the editorial boards of the Journal of Fluid Mechanics in 2016 and the Journal of the Royal Society Interface in 2014-2023. He was Co-Chairman of the U.S. National Committee for Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (USNC/TAM) in 2015-2018, and was a plenary lecturer at the 2022 USNC/TAM congress. He also took part in the Defense Science Study Group in 2014.


== Research ==
During his first tenure at Caltech, Dabiri was the director of the Biological Propulsion Laboratory. The lab's research examined fluid transport with applications in aquatic locomotion, fluid dynamic energy conversion, and cardiac flows, as well as applying theoretical methods in fluid dynamics and concepts of optimal vortex formation. He established the Caltech Field Laboratory for Optimized Wind Energy (FLOWE) in 2011, a wind farm that investigates energy exchange in an array of vertical-axis wind turbines.
To further advance in situ digital particle image velocimetry measurements of propulsion in aquatic animals, Dabiri and his student K. Katija designed and patented a device to measure the kinetic energy induced by swimming. 
Noting constructive interference in the hydrodynamic wakes of schooling fish, his research suggested that extracting energy from flow vortices could aid more than locomotion. The design of an array of vertical-axis turbines led to over an order of magnitude increase in power output per land area when compared to horizontal-axis wind turbine farms. Dabiri partnered with Windspire Energy for the use of three of the twenty-four turbines that stand approximately 30 feet tall and 4 feet wide. He founded Scalable Wind Solutions to commercialize the software used to optimally place wind turbines. Further research on wind farm design is being led by alumni of his lab working both in academia and in industry. Dabiri's research on jellyfish swimming led to the U.S. Navy funding development of an underwater craft that propels itself using up to 30% less energy than conventionally propelled craft.
After returning to Caltech, Dabiri’s research has focused on the hydrodynamics of electromechanically modified jellyfish, which he envisions for use in ocean exploration. Because jellyfish do not have brains nor pain receptors, Dabiri and colleagues have shown that their swimming can be externally manipulated without causing harm to the organism. Moreover, both the speed and efficiency of swimming can be improved by robotic control. An additional area of research in Dabiri’s lab focuses on the physics of turbulence transition. His recent work is exploring the role of the fluid-solid interface in theoretical predictions of turbulence transition.


== Teaching ==
Dabiri was named Professor of the Month at Caltech in February 2012. He has taught classes including a graduate class on propulsion, a biomechanics course, a lab class on experimental methods in aeronautics and applied physics, and the introduction to fluid mechanics course.
His interest in motivating students considering STEM fields was recounted in an NPR interview:

"Having two parents who encouraged me and, in some cases, forced me to study and to really take academics seriously was very important at an early stage. And then going through school, the role of my teachers was always so important. I remember my fourth-grade teacher ... [she] made me believe that I was smart and so I took that and sort of owned that and tried to live up to the expectations that she had placed on me, even as a fourth grader. And so we really want to grab hold of the imagination of the first graders and the second graders at a very early stage, and get them excited about becoming scientists, as excited as they are about becoming a firefighter or the next rap star."

He has also been involved in his church's mentoring program, The Faith Foundation.


== Honors and awards ==
Early honors include a Young Investigator Award from the Office of Naval Research, a Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers, and being named as one of Popular Science magazine's "Brilliant 10" scientists in 2008.
In 2010 Dabiri was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship for his theoretical engineering work. That same year, he gave the Convocation Address at Caltech.
Bloomberg Businessweek magazine listed him among its 2012 Technology Innovators.
Dabiri was awarded the 2020 Alan T. Waterman Award from NSF. In 2023, he was awarded the G. Evelyn Hutchinson Award for aquatic sciences.
Dabiri has been awarded NSF research grants multiple times in more than five different fields. He is a Fellow of the American Physical Society and the American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering.
In January 2025, President Joe Biden awarded Dabiri the National Medal of Science.


== Film consulting ==
In 2021, Dabiri served as a scientific consultant for Jordan Peele's science fiction film Nope. His role included advising on the biology-inspired design of the fictional creature, which drew on locomotion mechanisms observed in marine invertebrates such as jellyfish and squid. The goal of the collaboration was to create an undiscovered aerial predator with the ability to "hide in the clouds" (hence the scientific name of the fictional race: occulonimbus edoequus), "generate electric fields" and use "electric propulsion."


== References ==


== Notable publications ==
Dabiri, John O. (2009). "Optimal Vortex Formation as a Unifying Principle in Biological Propulsion". Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics. 41 (1). Annual Reviews: 17–33. Bibcode:2009AnRFM..41...17D. doi:10.1146/annurev.fluid.010908.165232. ISSN 0066-4189. S2CID 17088871. Caltech library # 14170.


== External links ==
Dabiri home page
Publications
John Dabiri at Google Scholar