The North East Combined Authority (NECA) is a combined authority in North East England. It has a directly-elected Mayor and seven member councils: two are unitary authorities (Durham and Northumberland) and five are metropolitan borough councils (Gateshead, Newcastle, North Tyneside, South Tyneside and Sunderland). The combined authority's area and the separate Tees Valley devolved region occupy the wider statistical region of North East England.
The authority was announced on 28 December 2022 in the  North East devolution deal. On 6 March 2024, the Government announced the North East deeper devolution deal, which allowed the new authority to absorb multiple previous devolved bodies and gave NECA increased devolved powers. The first election for the authority took place on 2 May 2024. The replacement of both the non-mayoral North East Combined Authority and the North of Tyne Combined Authority happened on 7 May 2024. The new combined authority was operational by the end of May 2024. 


== History ==
The Tyne and Wear County Council was abolished in 1986 alongside other metropolitan county governments. In 2004, a referendum (the 2004 North East England devolution referendum) was held in the North East region to establish a devolved assembly, which was rejected by voters.
The North East Combined Authority (NECA) was established in April 2014, including seven councils: Durham, Sunderland, Gateshead, South Tyneside, North Tyneside, Newcastle and Northumberland. A devolution deal was agreed, including the creation of a mayor to be elected in 2017. In September 2016, that deal broke down, as the leaders south of the Tyne were worried about the loss of EU funding, and in 2017 no mayor was elected.
From 2 November 2018, the boundaries of NECA were reduced to Durham, Sunderland, Gateshead and South Tyneside. The remaining areas left to form a mayoral combined authority called the North of Tyne Combined Authority. The division of the Tyneside built up area into two combined authorities was criticised.
In the Levelling Up white paper, the Government announced a larger mayoral combined authority would be created for the region. Durham was to negotiate a separate county deal. On 28 December 2022, Levelling Up Secretary Michael Gove announced a £1.4 billion devolution deal. The deal included the establishment of a unified mayoral combined authority, with a mayor to be elected in 2024. Martin Gannon, leader of Gateshead Council, said local councils were being forced into the deal and that it did not represent levelling up; he said he agreed with its introduction nevertheless. The seven local councils approved the final plans for the NECA on 9 November 2023, subject to approval by the chief executives of the councils, to allow for the Secretary of State to make the order for the NECA to be established.
The North East Mayoral Combined Authority (Establishment and Functions) Order 2024 was laid before Parliament on 8 February 2024 and was made as a statutory instrument on 20 March 2024. The Order dissolved two combined authorities to create NECA, prescribed the regeneration powers which the new Combined Authority holds and set out the functions which the elected Mayor will control.
On 6 March 2024, the Government announced the North East deeper devolution deal, which supersedes the previous devolution deal gave NECA increased devolved powers. The deeper devolution deal was signed on 18 March 2024. The deal includes provisions to establish a new North East Strategic Energy Board to coordinate energy supply and demand and promote growth in the offshore wind sector and a new North East Coastal and Rural Taskforce to strengthen the region’s rural and coastal communities.


== Geography ==


== Constitution ==


=== Constitution ===
The arrangements for NECA's governance were set out in the North East Mayoral Combined Authority (Establishment and Functions) Order 2024.
The NECA cabinet has eight voting members and two non-voting members:

Voting (8):
The mayor (1)
A member for each constituent council (7)
Non-Voting (2):
The Chair of the Business Board (1)
A representative of the community and voluntary sector (1)
The mayor provides leadership to the combined authority and chair combined authority meetings. A deputy mayor was appointed from among the voting members of the authority and the mayor may delegate mayoral functions to authority members. When the authority first meets it will have to decide what title the mayor is to be known by.


=== Mayoral functions ===
The functions devolved to the mayor are:

housing and regeneration
education, skills and training
the adult education budget
the functional power of competence
housing and planning, including mayoral development areas and corporations, land and acquisition powers
finance, through council precepts and business rate supplements
transport, including bus grants and franchising powers
The mayor is a member of the Mayoral Council for England and the Council of the Nations and Regions.


=== Cabinet ===
As at July 2025, the cabinet of the combined authority is as follows:


== See also ==
Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport Executive
Mayor of the North East


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website 
North East Devolution
North East Mayoral Combined Authority on X
North East Combined Authority Returning Officer
North East Local Enterprise Partnership