Tara L. Lemméy (  TARR-ə lə-MAY) is an American entrepreneur and the founder and CEO of LENS Ventures, an investment firm based in San Francisco.
She is the holder of more than twenty U.S. and international utility and design patents.


== Career ==
In 1998, Lemméy was a board member of TrustArc (then TRUSTe). In February 1999, she was appointed the executive director of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a position she held until 2000, when Shari Steele succeeded her.
In 2005, Lemméy was on the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Privacy Advisory Committee. In 2009, she became a part of the U.S. State Department's Technology Delegation to Mexico, which explored ways for U.S. technology companies to support Mexican citizens’ resistance against the country's drug cartels. In 2007, Lemméy served as a Commissioner on the Embassy of the Future Task Force at the Center for Strategic and International Studies as the "Ambassador from Silicon Valley". In 2010, she was a delegate to the White House Council on Women and Girls Women's Entrepreneurship Conference about public policy initiatives needed to move the women's business agendas forward.
Lemméy created DGREE.ORG, an initiative funded by the Lumina Foundation that focuses on student-centered learning. In 2010, she hosted the DGREE Summit, an event attended by business leaders, venture capitalists, education foundations, and university leaders and accreditors to focus on student-centric learning in a sustainable educational ecosystem.
She has collaborated with Harvard Professor Michael Sandel to create a Global Classroom to pioneer the use of mobile technology and video for global live debates about justice, rights, and democracy. The series of live experiences in the fall semester of 2012 brought together students of Sandel's Justice course with those in China, India, Japan, and Brazil, featuring a guest appearance by philosopher Peter Singer joining the Harvard audience in Sanders Theater live from New York.
Lemméy has spoken on risk and innovation at DO USA, Techonomic, TED India, Fortune Brainstorm Tech, Future in Review, Digital Media and Learning Conference, and has been published in Wired, Business Week, and the Harvard Business Review.
She is a member of Rework America, part of the Markle Economic Future Initiative established by the Markle Foundation. She served as a co-chair of the Technology Working Group on the Markle Foundation's Task Force on National Security in the Information Age and was the lead architect of the SHARE information environment recommendation which became the Information Sharing Environment.
Lemméy is the CEO and Founder of LENS, an investment firm that works with institutions to prepare for the future. She was CEO and founder of Net Power & Light, developer of technology for high-fidelity video collaboration and live experiences. She participated at the Aspen Institute and contributed to a report from the Aspen Round Table on Talent Development.
She is part of the leadership team at the Arizona Center for Integrative Medicine of the University of Arizona, with her role at the Center focused on innovation. Lemméy has collaborated with Andrew Weil and Victoria Maizes on Public Forum on nutrition and health, part of the center's annual Nutrition and Health Conference. She moderated the Public Forum on “Food and Health: Public Policy and Personal Choice” with Weil, Robert Lustig, and Michael Pollan, held in 2011 in San Francisco.
Lemméy has collaborated with the United States Department of State on public diplomacy and outreach programs around the world with her speaking tours on entrepreneurship, innovation, and economic growth in both Switzerland and Turkey.


== Awards and honors ==
Fast Company MCP 1000: Most Creative People in Business
Fast Company 100 Most Creative People in Business in 2013
2013 ComputerWorld Honors Laureates (Mobile Access)
Profiled in The Power of Pull: How Small Moves, Smartly Made, Can Set Big Things in Motion


== References ==