1967 (MCMLXVII) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Gregorian calendar, the 1967th year of the Common Era (CE) and Anno Domini (AD) designations, the 967th  year of the 2nd millennium, the 67th  year of the 20th century, and the  8th   year of the 1960s decade.  


== Events ==


=== January ===

January 1 – Canada begins a year-long celebration of the 100th anniversary of Confederation, featuring the Expo 67 World's Fair.
January 6 – Vietnam War: United States Marine Corps and Army of the Republic of Vietnam troops launch Operation Deckhouse Five in the Mekong Delta.
January 8 – Vietnam War: Operation Cedar Falls starts, in an attempt to eliminate the Iron Triangle.
January 13 – A military coup occurs in Togo under the leadership of Étienne Eyadema.
January 15 – Louis Leakey announces the discovery of pre-human fossils in Kenya; he names the species Kenyapithecus africanus.
January 23
In Munich, the trial begins of Wilhelm Harster, accused of the murder of 82,856 Jews (including Anne Frank) when he led German security police during the German occupation of the Netherlands. He is eventually sentenced to 15 years in prison.
Milton Keynes in England is founded as a new town by Order in Council, with a planning brief to become a city of 250,000 people. Its initial designated area encloses three existing towns and twenty one villages. The area to be developed is largely farmland, with evidence of permanent settlement dating back to the Bronze Age.
January 25 – South Vietnamese junta leader and Prime Minister Nguyen Cao Ky forces his rival, Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister Nguyen Huu Co, into exile while overseas on a diplomatic visit.
January 26
The Parliament of the United Kingdom decides to nationalise 90% of the nation's steel industry.
The largest-ever blizzard to hit the US city of Chicago begins.
January 27
Apollo 1: U.S. astronauts Gus Grissom, Ed White and Roger Chaffee are killed when fire breaks out in their Apollo spacecraft during a launch pad test.
The United States, Soviet Union and United Kingdom sign the Outer Space Treaty (ratified by USSR May 19; comes into force October 10), prohibiting weapons of mass destruction from space.
January 31 – West Germany and Romania establish diplomatic relations.


=== February ===

February 3 – Ronald Ryan becomes the last man hanged in Australia, for murdering a guard while escaping from prison in December 1965.
February 5
NASA launches Lunar Orbiter 3.
Italy's first guided missile cruiser, the Vittorio Veneto, is launched.
General Anastasio Somoza Debayle becomes president of Nicaragua.
February 6 – Alexei Kosygin arrives in the UK for an 8-day visit. He meets The Queen on February 9.
February 7 – Serious bushfires in southern Tasmania claim 62 lives and destroy 2,642.7 square kilometres (653,025.4 acres) of land.
February 10 – The Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution (presidential succession and disability) is ratified.
February 11 – Burgess Ice Rise, lying off the west coast of Alexander Island, Antarctica, is first mapped by the British Antarctic Survey (BAS).
February 13 – American researchers discover the Madrid Codices by Leonardo da Vinci in the National Library of Spain.
February 22
Suharto takes power from Sukarno in Indonesia (see Transition to the New Order and Supersemar).
Donald Sangster becomes the new prime minister of Jamaica, succeeding Alexander Bustamante.
February 23
Trinidad and Tobago is the first Commonwealth nation to join the Organization of American States.
The Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution is enacted.
February 24 – Moscow forbids its satellite states to form diplomatic relations with West Germany.
February 25 – Britain's second Polaris missile submarine, HMS Renown, is launched.
February 26 – A Soviet nuclear test is conducted at the Semipalatinsk Test Site, Eastern Kazakhstan.


=== March ===

March 1
Brazilian police arrest Franz Stangl, ex-commander of Treblinka and Sobibór extermination camps.
Óscar Gestido is sworn in as President of Uruguay after 15 years of collegiate government.
March 4
The first North Sea gas is pumped ashore at Easington, East Riding of Yorkshire, UK.
Queens Park Rangers become the first 3rd Division side to win the English Football League Cup at Wembley Stadium, defeating West Bromwich Albion 3–2.
March 9 – Joseph Stalin's daughter, Svetlana Alliluyeva, defects to the United States via the U.S. Embassy in New Delhi.
March 11 – The first phase of the Cambodian Civil War begins between the Kingdom of Cambodia and the Khmer Rouge.
March 12 – The Indonesian State Assembly takes all presidential powers from Sukarno and names Suharto as acting president (Suharto resigned in 1998).
March 13 – Moise Tshombe, ex-prime minister of Congo, is sentenced to death in absentia.
March 14
The body of U.S. President John F. Kennedy is moved to a permanent burial place at Arlington National Cemetery.
Nine executives of the German pharmaceutical company Grunenthal are charged with breaking German drug laws because of thalidomide.
March 18
Torrey Canyon oil spill: The supertanker SS Torrey Canyon runs aground between Land's End and the Scilly Isles off the coast of Britain, causing the biggest oil spill in history up to that point.
March 19 – A referendum in French Somaliland favors the connection to France.
March 21
A military coup takes place in Sierra Leone.
Vietnam War: In ongoing campus unrest, Howard University students protesting the Vietnam War, the ROTC program on campus and the draft, confront Gen. Lewis Hershey, then head of the U.S. Selective Service System, and as he attempts to deliver an address, shout him down with cries of "America is the Black man's battleground!"
Charles Manson is released from Terminal Island. Telling the authorities that prison had become his home, he requested permission to stay. Upon his release, he relocates to San Francisco where he spends the Summer of Love.
March 26 – Jim Thompson, co-founder of the Thai Silk Company, disappears from the Cameron Highlands.
March 28 – Pope Paul VI issues the encyclical Populorum progressio.
March 29
The first French nuclear submarine, Le Redoutable, is launched.
The SEACOM Asian telephone cable is inaugurated.
Torrey Canyon oil spill: British Fleet Air Arm and Royal Air Force aircraft bomb and sink the grounded supertanker SS Torrey Canyon.


=== April ===

April 2 – A United Nations delegation arrives in Aden as its independence approaches. The delegation leaves April 7, accusing British authorities of lack of cooperation. The British say the delegation did not contact them.
April 4 – Martin Luther King Jr. denounces the Vietnam War during his sermon at the Riverside Church in New York City.
April 7 – Six-Day War (approach): Israeli fighters shoot down 7 Syrian MIG-21s.
April 8 – Puppet on a String by Sandie Shaw (music and lyrics by Bill Martin and Phil Coulter) wins the Eurovision Song Contest 1967 for the United Kingdom.
April 9 – The first Boeing 737 (A-100 series) takes its maiden flight.
April 10 – The AFTRA strike is settled just in time for the 39th Academy Awards ceremony to be held, hosted by Bob Hope. Best Picture goes to A Man for All Seasons.
April 15 – Large demonstrations are held against US involvement in the Vietnam War in New York City and San Francisco. The march, organized by the National Mobilization Committee to End the War in Vietnam, from Central Park to the United Nations drew hundreds of thousands of people, including Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Harry Belafonte, James Bevel, and Dr. Benjamin Spock, who marched and spoke at the event. A simultaneous march in San Francisco is attended by Coretta Scott King.
April 20
The Surveyor 3 probe lands on the Moon.
A Globe Air Bristol Britannia turboprop crashes at Nicosia, Cyprus, killing 126 people.
April 21
Greece suffers a military coup by a group of military officers, who establish a military dictatorship led by Georgios Papadopoulos; future-Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou remains a political prisoner till December 25. The dictatorship ends in 1974.
An outbreak of tornadoes strikes the upper Midwest section of the United States (in particular the Chicago area, including the suburbs of Belvidere and Oak Lawn, Illinois where 33 people are killed and 500 injured).
April 23 – A group of young leftist radicals are expelled from the Nicaraguan Socialist Party (PSN). This group goes on to found the Socialist Workers Party (POS).
April 24 – Soyuz 1: Vladimir Komarov becomes the first Soviet cosmonaut to die, when the parachute of his space capsule fails during re-entry.
April 27 – Montreal, Quebec, Expo 67, a World's Fair to coincide with the Canadian Confederation centennial, officially opens with Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson igniting the Expo Flame in the Place des Nations.
April 28
In Houston, Texas, United States, boxer Muhammad Ali refuses military service. He is stripped of his boxing title and barred from professional boxing for the next three years.
Expo 67 opens to the public, with over 310,000 people attending. Al Carter from Chicago is the first visitor as noted by Expo officials.
The U.S. aerospace manufacturer McDonnell Douglas is formed through a merger of McDonnell Aircraft and Douglas Aircraft (it becomes part of The Boeing Company three decades later).
April 29 – Fidel Castro announces that all intellectual property belongs to the people and that Cuba intends to translate and publish technical literature without compensation.
April 30 – Moscow's 537 m tall TV tower is finished.


=== May ===

May 1
Elvis Presley and Priscilla Beaulieu are married in Las Vegas.
GO Transit, Canada's first interregional public transit system, is established.
May 2
The Toronto Maple Leafs win the Stanley Cup. It is their last Stanley Cup and last finals appearance to date. It will turn out to be the last game in the Original Six era. Six more teams will be added in the fall.
British Prime Minister Harold Wilson announces that the United Kingdom has decided to apply for EEC membership.
May 4 – Lunar Orbiter 4 is launched by the United States.
May 6
Zakir Husain is the first Muslim to become president of India.
Hong Kong 1967 riots: Clashes between striking workers and police kill 51 and injure 800.
May 8 – The Philippine province of Davao is split into three: Davao del Norte, Davao del Sur, and Davao Oriental.
May 9 – A partial solar eclipse took place.
May 10 – The Greek military government accuses Andreas Papandreou of treason.
May 11 – The United Kingdom and Ireland apply officially for European Economic Community membership.
May 15 – The Waiting period leading up to the Six-Day War begins.
May 17
Syria mobilizes against Israel.
President Gamal Abdal Nasser of Egypt demands withdrawal of the peacekeeping UN Emergency Force in the Sinai. U.N. Secretary-General U Thant complies (May 18).
May 18
Tennessee Governor Ellington repeals the "Monkey Law" (officially the Butler Act; see the Scopes Trial).
In Mexico, schoolteacher Lucio Cabañas begins guerrilla warfare in Atoyac de Alvarez, west of Acapulco, in the state of Guerrero.
NASA announces the crew for the Apollo 7 space mission (the first in the Apollo series with a crew): Wally Schirra, Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham.
May 19 – Yuri Andropov becomes KGB chief in the Soviet Union.
May 20 – The Spring Mobilization Conference, a gathering of 700 antiwar activists is held in Washington D.C. to chart the future moves for the U.S. antiwar movement
May 22 – The Innovation department store in the centre of Brussels, Belgium, burns down. It is the most devastating fire in Belgian history, resulting in 323 dead and missing and 150 injured.
May 23
A significant worldwide geomagnetic flare unfolded. Radio emissions coming from the Sun jammed military surveillance radars.
Egypt closes the Straits of Tiran to Israeli shipping, blockading Israel's southern port of Eilat, and Israel's entire Red Sea coastline.
25 May – Celtic F.C. defeat Inter Milan 2–1 in Lisbon to win the European Cup, becoming the first British football club to win the competition. The team, later nicknamed the Lisbon Lions, was composed entirely of players born within 30 miles of Glasgow.
May 26 – The Beatles release the groundbreaking album Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band in the United Kingdom. It becomes one of the most influential albums in popular music history.
May 27
Naxalite Guerrilla War: Beginning with a peasant uprising in the town of Naxalbari, this Marxist/Maoist rebellion sputters on in the Indian countryside. The guerrillas operate among the impoverished peasants, fighting both the government security forces and private paramilitary groups funded by wealthy landowners. Most fighting takes place in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and Madhya Pradesh.
The Australian referendum, 1967 passes with an overwhelming 90% support, removing, from the Australian Constitution, 2 discriminatory sentences referring to Indigenous Australians. It signifies Australia's first step in recognising Indigenous rights.
May 30 – Biafra, in eastern Nigeria, announces its independence, which is not recognized.


=== June ===

June 2 – Protests in West Berlin against the arrival of the Shah of Iran turn into fights, during which 27-year-old student Benno Ohnesorg is killed by a police officer. His death results in the founding of the terrorist group 2 June Movement.
June 4 – Stockport air disaster: British Midland flight G-ALHG crashes in Hopes Carr, Stockport, killing 72 passengers and crew.
June 5 – Six-Day War begins: Israel launches Operation Focus, an attack on Egyptian Air Force airfields; the allied armies of Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and Jordan invade Israel. Battle of Ammunition Hill, start of the Jordanian campaign
June 7 – East Jerusalem is captured in a battle conducted by Israeli forces, without the use of artillery, in order to avoid damage to the Holy City.
June 8
Ras Sedr massacre in the Sinai Peninsula: a mass killing of dozens of Egyptian prisoners of war by the Israel Defense Forces.
USS Liberty incident: a United States Navy spy ship is attacked by Israeli forces, allegedly in error, killing 34 crew.
Egypt severs diplomatic relations with the United States.
June 10
Six-Day War ends: Israel and Syria agree to a United Nations-mediated cease-fire.
The Soviet Union severs diplomatic relations with Israel.
Margrethe, heir apparent to the throne of Denmark, marries French count Henri de Laborde de Monpezat.
June 11 – A race riot occurs in Tampa, Florida after the shooting death of Martin Chambers by police while he was allegedly robbing a camera store. The unrest lasts several days.
June 12
Loving v. Virginia: The United States Supreme Court declares all U.S. state laws prohibiting interracial marriage to be unconstitutional.
Venera program: Venera 4 is launched by the Soviet Union (the first space probe to enter another planet's atmosphere and successfully return data).
June 13 – Solicitor General Thurgood Marshall is nominated as the first African American justice of the United States Supreme Court.
June 14 – Mariner program: Mariner 5 is launched toward Venus.
June 16 – The Monterey Pop Festival begins and is held for 3 days.
June 17 – Project 639: The People's Republic of China tests its first hydrogen bomb.
June 18 – Eighteen British soldiers are killed in the Aden police mutiny.
June 23 – Cold War: U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson meets with Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin in Glassboro, New Jersey, for the 3-day Glassboro Summit Conference. Johnson travels to Los Angeles for a dinner at the Century Plaza Hotel where earlier in the day thousands of war protesters clashed with L.A. police.
June 24 – Flooding kills six cavers in Mossdale Caverns in the United Kingdom, the single deadliest incident in British caving.
June 25 – 400 million viewers watch Our World, the first live, international, satellite television production. It features the live debut of The Beatles' song "All You Need Is Love".
June 26
Pope Paul VI ordains 27 new cardinals (one of whom is the future Pope John Paul II).
The Buffalo Race Riot begins, lasting until July 1; leads to 200 arrests.

June 27 – The first automatic cash machine (voucher-based) is installed, in the office of Barclays Bank in Enfield, England.
June 28 – Israel declares the annexation of East Jerusalem.
June 30 – Moise Tshombe, former president of Katanga and former prime minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, is kidnapped and taken to Algeria.


=== July ===

July 1
Canada celebrates its first one hundred years of Confederation.
The EEC joins with the European Coal and Steel Community and the European Atomic Community, to form the European Communities (from the 1980s usually known as European Community [EC]).
Seaboard Air Line Railroad merges with Atlantic Coast Line Railroad to become Seaboard Coast Line Railroad, first step to today's CSX Transportation.
The first UK colour television broadcasts begin on BBC2. The first one is from the Wimbledon tennis championships. A full colour service begins on BBC2 on December 2.
American Samoa's first constitution becomes effective.
July 3 – A military rebellion led by Belgian mercenary Jean Schramme begins in Katanga, Democratic Republic of the Congo.
July 4 – The British Parliament decriminalizes homosexuality.
July 5 – Troops of Belgian mercenary commander Jean Schramme revolt against Mobutu Sese Seko, and try to take control of Stanleyville, Congo.
July 6
Nigerian Civil War: Nigerian forces invade the secessionist Biafra May 30.
Langenweddingen level crossing disaster: A level crossing collision between a train loaded with children and a tanker-truck near Magdeburg, East Germany, kills 94 people, mostly children.
July 7 – All You Need Is Love is released in the UK.
July 10
Heavy massive rains and a landslide at Kobe and Kure, Hiroshima, Japan, kill at least 371.
New Zealand decimalises its currency from pound to dollar at £1 to $2 ($1 = 10/-).
July 12
The Greek military regime strips 480 Greeks of their citizenship.
1967 Newark riots: After the arrest of an African-American cab driver for allegedly illegally driving around a police car and gunning it down the road, race riots break out in Newark, New Jersey, lasting 5 days and leaving 26 dead.
July 14 – Near Newark, New Jersey, the Plainfield, NJ, riots take place.
July 16 – A prison riot in Jay, Florida, United States leaves 37 dead.
July 19
A race riot breaks out in the North Side of Minneapolis on Plymouth Street during the Minneapolis Aquatennial Parade; businesses are vandalized and fires break out in the area, although the disturbance is quelled within hours. However, the next day a shooting sets off another incident in the same area that leads to 18 fires, 36 arrests, 3 shootings, 2 dozen people injured, and damages totaling 4.2 million. Two more such incidents occur during the following two weeks.
Eighty-two people are killed in a collision between Piedmont Airlines Flight 22 and a Cessna 310 near Hendersonville, North Carolina, United States.
July 20 – Chilean poet Pablo Neruda receives the first Viareggio-Versile prize.
July 23–31 – 12th Street Riot: In Detroit, one of the worst riots in United States history begins on 12th Street in the predominantly African American inner city: 43 are killed, 342 injured and 1,400 buildings burned.
July 24 – During an official state visit to Canada, French President Charles de Gaulle declares to a crowd of over 100,000 in Montreal: Vive le Québec libre! (Long live free Quebec!). The statement, interpreted as support for Quebec independence, delights many Quebecers but angers the Canadian government and many English Canadians.
July 29
An explosion and fire aboard the U.S. Navy aircraft carrier USS Forrestal in the Gulf of Tonkin leaves 134 dead.
Georges Bidault moves to Belgium where he receives political asylum.
An earthquake in Caracas, Venezuela leaves 240 dead.
July 30 – The 1967 Milwaukee race riots begin, lasting through August 3 and leading to a ten-day shutdown of the city from August 1.


=== August ===

August 1 – The UAC TurboTrain makes its first journey.
August 6 – A pulsar is noted by Jocelyn Bell and Antony Hewish. The discovery is first recorded in print in 1968: "An entirely novel kind of star came to light on Aug. 6 last year [...]".
August 7
Vietnam War: The People's Republic of China agrees to give North Vietnam an undisclosed amount of aid in the form of a grant.
A general strike in the old quarter of Jerusalem protests Israel's unification of the city.
August 8 – The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is founded in Bangkok, Thailand.
August 9 – Vietnam War – Operation Cochise: United States Marines begin a new operation in the Que Son Valley.
August 10 – Belgian mercenary Jean Schramme's troops take the Congolese border town of Bukavu.
August 15 – The United Kingdom Marine, &c., Broadcasting (Offences) Act 1967 declares participation in offshore pirate radio illegal. Radio Caroline defies the act and continues broadcasting.
August 19 – West Germany receives 36 East German prisoners it has "purchased" through the border posts of Herleshausen and Wartha.
August 21
A truce is declared in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Two U.S. Navy jets stray into the airspace of the People's Republic of China following an attack on a target in North Vietnam and are shot down. Lt. Robert J. Flynn, the only survivor, is captured alive and will be held prisoner by China until 1973.
August 24 – Pakistan's first steel mill is inaugurated in Chittagong, East Pakistan (Bangladesh).
August 30 – Thurgood Marshall is confirmed as Justice of the United States Supreme Court. He is the first African American to hold the position.


=== September ===

September 1
The Khmer–Chinese Friendship Association is banned in Cambodia.
Ilse Koch, known as the "Witch of Buchenwald", commits suicide in the Bavarian prison of Aichach.
September 3
Nguyễn Văn Thiệu is elected President of South Vietnam.
At 5:00 a.m. local time, all road traffic in Sweden switches from left-hand traffic pattern to right-hand traffic.
September 4 – Vietnam War – Operation Swift: The United States Marines launch a search and destroy mission in Quảng Nam and Quảng Tín provinces. The ensuing 4-day battle in Que Son Valley kills 114 Americans and 376 North Vietnamese.
September 10 – In a Gibraltar sovereignty referendum, only 44 voters out of 12,182 in the British Crown colony of Gibraltar support union with Spain.
September 17
A riot during a football match in Kayseri, Turkey leaves 44 dead, about 600 injured.
Jim Morrison and The Doors defy CBS censors on The Ed Sullivan Show, when Morrison sings the word "higher" from their #1 hit Light My Fire, despite having been asked not to.
September 27 – The RMS Queen Mary arrives in Southampton at the end of her last transatlantic crossing.
September 30 – In the United Kingdom, BBC Radio completely restructures its national programming: the Light Programme is split between new national pop station Radio 1 (modelled on the successful pirate station Radio London) and Radio 2; the cultural Third Programme is rebranded as Radio 3; and the primarily-talk Home Service becomes Radio 4.


=== October ===

October 3 – An X-15 research aircraft with test pilot William J. Knight establishes an unofficial world fixed-wing speed record of Mach 6.7.
October 4
Omar Ali Saifuddin III of Brunei abdicates in favour of his son, His Majesty Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah.
The Shag Harbour UFO incident occurs.
October 5 – Widespread coverage of the mutilation of "Snippy" the horse.
October 6 – Southern California's Pacific Ocean Park, known as the "Disneyland By The Sea", closes down.
October 8 – Guerrilla leader Che Guevara and his men are captured in Bolivia; they are executed the following day.
October 12
Vietnam War: U.S. Secretary of State Dean Rusk states during a news conference that, because of North Vietnam's opposition, proposals by the U.S. Congress for peace initiatives are futile.
The Naked Ape, by Desmond Morris, is published.
October 14 – Quebec Nationalism: René Lévesque leaves the Liberal Party.
October 16 – Thirty-nine people, including singer-activist Joan Baez, are arrested in Oakland, California, for blocking the entrance of that city's military induction center.
October 17
The musical Hair opens off-Broadway. It moves to Broadway the following April.
Vietnam War: The Battle of Ong Thanh takes place.
October 18
Vietnam War: Students at the University of Wisconsin–Madison protest over recruitment by Dow Chemical on the university campus; 76 are injured in the resulting riot.
Walt Disney's 19th full-length animated feature The Jungle Book, the last animated film personally supervised by Disney, is released and becomes an enormous box-office and critical success. On a double bill with the film is the (now) much less well-known true-life adventure, Charlie the Lonesome Cougar.
The Venera 4 probe descends through the Venusian atmosphere.
A total lunar eclipse occurred.
October 19 – The Mariner 5 probe flies by Venus.
October 20 – Patterson–Gimlin film: Roger Patterson and Robert Gimlin's famous film of an unidentified animate cryptid, thought to be Bigfoot or Sasquatch, is recorded at Bluff Creek, California.
October 21
Approximately 70,000 Vietnam War protesters march in Washington, D.C. and rally at the Lincoln Memorial; in a successive march that day, 50,000 people march to the Pentagon, where Allen Ginsberg, Abbie Hoffman, and Jerry Rubin symbolically chant to "levitate" the building and "exorcise the evil within."
An Egyptian surface-to-surface missile sinks the Israeli destroyer Eilat, killing 47 Israeli sailors. Israel retaliates by shelling Egyptian refineries along the Suez Canal.
October 23 – Charles de Gaulle becomes the first French Co-Prince of Andorra to visit his Andorran subjects. In addition to being President of France, de Gaulle is a joint ruler (along with Spain's Bishop of Urgel) of the tiny nation located in the mountains between France and Spain, pursuant to the 1278 agreement creating the nation.
October 25 – The Abortion Act 1967 passes in the British Parliament and receives royal assent two days later.
October 26
The coronation ceremony of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of Iran, ruler of the nation since 1941, takes place.
U.S. Navy pilot John McCain is shot down over North Vietnam and taken prisoner. His capture is confirmed two days later, and he remains a prisoner of war for more than five years.
October 27 – French President Charles de Gaulle vetoes British entry into the European Economic Community for the second time in the decade.
October 29
President Joseph Mobutu of the Democratic Republic of the Congo launches an offensive against mercenaries in Bukavu.
Expo 67 closes in Montreal, after having attracted more than 50 million visitors in six months.
October 30 – Hong Kong 1967 riots: British troops and Chinese demonstrators clash on the border of China and Hong Kong.


=== November ===

November – Islamabad officially becomes Pakistan's political capital.
November 2
Vietnam War: U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson holds a secret meeting with a group of the nation's most prestigious leaders ("the Wise Men") and asks them to suggest ways to unite the American people behind the war effort. They conclude that the American people should be given more optimistic reports on the progress of the war.
A non-central total solar eclipse took place.
November 3 – Vietnam War – Battle of Dak To: Around Đắk Tô (located about 280 miles north of Saigon near the Cambodian border), heavy casualties are suffered on both sides; U.S. troops narrowly win the battle on November 22.
November 4–5 – In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, mercenaries of Jean Schramme and Jerry Puren withdraw from Bukavu, over the Shangugu Bridge, to Rwanda.
November 6 – The Rhodesian parliament passes pro-Apartheid laws.
November 7
U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson signs the Public Broadcasting Act of 1967, establishing the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.
Carl B. Stokes is elected Mayor of Cleveland, Ohio, becoming the first African American elected mayor of a major United States city.
The 50th anniversary of the Great October Socialist Revolution is celebrated in the Soviet Union.
November 9 – Apollo program: NASA launches the first Saturn V rocket, successfully carrying the Apollo 4 test spacecraft from Cape Kennedy into Earth orbit.
November 11 – Vietnam War: In a ceremony in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, 3 United States prisoners of war are released by the Viet Cong and turned over to American "New Left" antiwar activist Tom Hayden.
November 14 – The Congress of Colombia, in commemoration of the 150-year anniversary of the death of Policarpa Salavarrieta, declares this day as the "Day of the Colombian Woman".
November 15
General Georgios Grivas and his 10,000 strong Greek Army division are forced to leave Cyprus, after 24 Turkish Cypriot civilians are killed by the Greek Cypriot National Guard in the villages of Kophinou and Ayios Theodhoros; relations sour between Nicosia and Athens. Turkey flies sorties into Greek territory, and masses troops in Thrace on her border with Greece.
Test pilot Michael Adams is killed when his X-15 rocket plane tumbles out of control during atmospheric re-entry and disintegrates.
November 17
Vietnam War: Acting on optimistic reports he was given on November 13, U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson tells the nation that, while much remains to be done, "We are inflicting greater losses than we're taking ... We are making progress." (Two months later the Tet Offensive by the Viet Cong is widely reported as a Viet Cong victory by the U.S. press and thus as a major setback to the U.S.)
French author Régis Debray is sentenced to 30 years imprisonment in Bolivia. (He will be released in 1970 after less than three years imprisonment.)
November 18 – The UK pound is devalued from £1 = US$2.80 to £1 = US$2.40.
November 19 – The establishment of TVB, the first wireless commercial television station in Hong Kong.
November 20 – The "population clock" of the United States Census Bureau records the U.S. population at 200 million people at 11:03 a.m. Washington, D.C. time.
November 21 – Vietnam War: United States General William Westmoreland tells news reporters: "I am absolutely certain that whereas in 1965 the enemy was winning, today he is certainly losing."
November 22 – UN Security Council Resolution 242 is adopted by the UN Security Council, establishing a set of principles aimed at guiding negotiations for an Arab–Israeli peace settlement.
November 25 – 1967 Australian Senate election: The Liberal/Country Coalition government led by Prime Minister Harold Holt lost two seats, while the Labor Party led by Gough Whitlam failed to make any gains. The Democratic Labor Party won the two seats from the Liberals and gained the sole balance of power in the Senate.
November 26 – Major floods hit Lisbon, Portugal, killing 462.
November 27 – The Beatles release Magical Mystery Tour in the U.S. as a full album. The songs added to the original six songs on the double EP include "All You Need Is Love", "Penny Lane", "Strawberry Fields Forever", "Baby, You're a Rich Man" and "Hello, Goodbye". Release as a double EP will not take place in the UK until December.
November 28 – The first pulsar to be discovered by Earth observers is found in the constellation of Vulpecula by astronomers Jocelyn Bell Burnell and Antony Hewish, and is given the name PSR B1919+21.
November 29 – Vietnam War: U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara announces his resignation to become president of the World Bank. McNamara's resignation follows U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson's outright rejection of McNamara's early November recommendations to freeze troop levels, stop the bombing of North Vietnam, and hand over ground fighting to South Vietnam.
November 30
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto founds the Pakistan People's Party and becomes its first chairman. It has gone on to become one of Pakistan's major political parties (alongside the Pakistan Muslim League) that is broken into many factions, bearing the same name under different leaders, such as the Pakistan's Peoples Party Parliamentarians (PPPP).
The People's Republic of South Yemen becomes independent of the United Kingdom.
Pro-Soviet communists in the Philippines establish Malayang Pagkakaisa ng Kabataan Pilipino as its new youth wing.
U.S. Senator Eugene McCarthy announces his candidacy for the Democratic Party presidential nomination, challenging incumbent President Lyndon B. Johnson over the Vietnam War.


=== December ===

December 1 – The RMS Queen Mary is retired. Her place is taken by the Queen Elizabeth 2.
December 3 – Christiaan Barnard carries out the world's first heart transplant at Groote Schuur Hospital in Cape Town, South Africa.
December 4
At 6:50 PM, a volcano erupts on Deception Island in Antarctica.
Vietnam War: U.S. and South Vietnamese forces engage Viet Cong troops in the Mekong Delta (235 of the 300-strong Viet Cong battalion are killed).
December 5 – In New York City, Benjamin Spock and Allen Ginsberg are arrested for protesting against the Vietnam War.
December 6 – Vice President Jorge Pacheco Areco is sworn in as President of Uruguay after President Oscar Gestido dies in office.
December 8 – Magical Mystery Tour is released by The Beatles as a double EP in the UK, while the only psychedelic rock album by The Rolling Stones, Their Satanic Majesties Request, is released in the UK and in the US.
December 9
Nicolae Ceaușescu becomes the Chairman of the Romanian State Council, making him the de facto leader of Romania.
Jim Morrison is arrested on stage in New Haven, Connecticut for attempting to spark a riot in the audience during a concert.
December 11 – Supersonic airliner Concorde is unveiled in Toulouse, France.
December 12 – Guess Who's Coming to Dinner, one of the seminal race relations films of the 1960s, is released to theaters.
December 13 – King Constantine II of Greece flees the country when his coup attempt fails.
December 15 – The Silver Bridge over the Ohio River in Point Pleasant, West Virginia, collapses, killing 46 people.
December 17 – Harold Holt, 17th Prime Minister of Australia, disappears when swimming at Cheviot Beach, 60 km from Melbourne. He was briefly replaced as prime minister by John McEwen, until the Liberal Party elected Minister for Education and Science John Gorton as leader.
December 19 – The Rescue Agreement setting forth rights and obligations in outer space is voted into consensus by the United Nations General Assembly.
December 26 – The Beatles' film Magical Mystery Tour receives its world première on BBC Television in the UK.
December 29 – Hyundai Motor founded in South Korea.
December 31 – Motorcycle daredevil Evel Knievel attempts to jump 141 feet over the Caesars Palace Fountains on the Las Vegas Strip in the United States. Knievel crashes on landing and the accident is caught on film.


=== Date unknown ===
Warner Bros. becomes a wholly owned subsidiary of Seven Arts Productions, thus becoming Warner Bros.-Seven Arts.
The Jari project begins in the Amazon.
Albania is officially declared an atheist state by its leader, Enver Hoxha.
Lonsdaleite (the rarest allotrope of carbon) is first discovered in the Barringer Crater, Arizona.
St Christopher's Hospice, the world's first purpose-built secular hospice specialising in palliative care of the terminally ill, is established in South London by Dame Cicely Saunders with the support of Albertine Winner.
PAL is first introduced in Germany.
Gunsmoke, after 12 seasons and with declining ratings, almost gets cancelled, but protests from viewers, network affiliates and even members of Congress and especially William S. Paley, the head of the network, lead the network to move the series from its longtime late Saturday time slot to early Mondays for the fall—displacing Gilligan's Island, which initially had been renewed for a fourth season but is cancelled instead. Gunsmoke would remain on CBS until 1975.
The Greek military junta exiles Melina Mercouri.


== Births ==


=== January ===

January 2
Tia Carrere, American actress
Francois Pienaar, South African rugby union player
January 6 – A. R. Rahman, Indian composer, singer, and music producer
January 7
Nick Clegg, British politician
Irrfan Khan, Indian actor (d. 2020)
January 8 – R. Kelly, American R&B singer, songwriter, and convicted sex offender
January 9 – Dave Matthews, South African–born American musician
January 11 – Michael Healy-Rae, Irish politician
January 12 – Vendela Kirsebom, Norwegian supermodel
January 14
Kerri Green, American actress and film director
Leo Ortolani, Italian comic book author
January 15 – Lisa Lisa, American actress and singer
January 16 – Andrea James, American producer and author
January 17 – Song Kang-ho, Korean actor
January 18 – Iván Zamorano, Chilean footballer
January 20 – Kellyanne Conway, American pollster, political consultant, and pundit
January 21 – Artashes Minasian, Armenian chess grandmaster
January 23
Magdalena Andersson, 34th Prime Minister of Sweden
Belkis Ayón, Cuban printmaker (d. 1999)
Naim Süleymanoğlu, Turkish weightlifter (d. 2017)
January 24
Phil LaMarr, American actor, voice actor, comedian, and writer
John Myung, American musician
January 25
Nozomu Sasaki, Japanese voice actor
Voltaire, Cuban singer
January 29
Khalid Skah, Moroccan long-distance runner
Cyril Suk, Czech tennis player
January 31 – Fat Mike, American musician and producer


=== February ===

February 1 – Meg Cabot, American teen author
February 4 – Sergei Grinkov, Russian figure skater (d. 1995)
February 5 – Chris Parnell, American actor, voice artist, comedian, and singer
February 6 – Izumi Sakai, Japanese singer (Zard) (d. 2007)
February 10
Laura Dern, American actress
Vince Gilligan, American writer, director and producer
February 14
Manuela Maleeva, Bulgarian born-Swiss tennis player
Mark Rutte, Dutch politician, 50th Prime Minister of the Netherlands since 2010.
Sir Stelios Haji-Ioannou, British-Greek entrepreneur
Bernie Moreno, American politician and businessman
February 18
Roberto Baggio, Italian football player
Colin Jackson, British former sprint and hurdling athlete
February 19 – Benicio del Toro, Puerto Rican actor
February 20
Kurt Cobain, American musician (Nirvana) (d. 1994)
Lili Taylor, American actress
February 26
Currie Graham, Canadian actor
Kazuyoshi Miura, Japanese footballer
February 27 – Jonathan Ive, British industrial designer (Apple Inc.)


=== March ===

March 1 – George Eads, American actor
March 4 – Daryll Cullinan, South African cricketer
March 6
Connie Britton, American actress
Glenn Greenwald, American journalist and author
Mihai Tudose, Prime Minister of Romania
March 7 – Jean-Pierre Barda, Swedish singer (Army of Lovers)
March 9 – Nikolas Vogel, German actor and news camera operator (d. 1991)
March 11 – John Barrowman, Scottish-American actor and singer
March 12 – Massimiliano Frezzato, Italian comic writer
March 13
Andrés Escobar, Colombian football player (d. 1994)
Roger Schmidt, German football player and coach
March 15 – Naoko Takeuchi, Japanese artist
March 16 – Lauren Graham, American actress and singer
March 19 – Sandra Dombrowski, Swiss ice hockey player and referee
March 21 – Jonas Berggren, Swedish musician
March 22 – Mario Cipollini, Italian cyclist
March 25
Matthew Barney, American sculptor, photographer and filmmaker
Debi Thomas, American figure skater
March 27
Kenta Kobashi, Japanese professional wrestler
Talisa Soto, American actress
March 29 – Nathalie Cardone, French actress and singer
March 30
Albert-László Barabási, Romanian-born Hungarian-American physicist
Christopher Bowman, American figure skater (d. 2008)
Megumi Hayashibara, Japanese actress and voice actress


=== April ===

April 2 – Renée Estevez, American actress and writer
April 5 – Anu Garg, Indian-American writer and speaker
April 9 – Sam Harris, American neuroscientist and political podcast host
April 11 – Liina Olmaru, Estonian actress
April 14 – Steve Chiasson, Canadian ice hockey player (d. 1999)
April 15 – Dara Torres, American swimmer
April 17
Henry Ian Cusick, Scottish-Peruvian actor and director
Kimberly Elise, African-American actress
Liz Phair, American musician
April 18 – Maria Bello, American actress
April 20
Mike Portnoy, American musician
Lara Jill Miller, American actress
Raymond van Barneveld, Dutch darts player
April 22
Sheryl Lee, American actress
Sherri Shepherd, American comedian and TV show host
April 23
Melina Kanakaredes, American actress
Eleonora De Angelis, Italian voice actress
April 24 – Dino Rađa, Croatian basketball player
April 26 – Marianne Jean-Baptiste, English actress, singer-songwriter, composer and director
April 27 – Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands, King of the Netherlands
April 29
Curtis Joseph, Canadian hockey player
Rachel Williams, American model, actress and television presenter
April 30 – Steven Mackintosh, English actor


=== May ===

May 1
Scott Coffey, American actor and director
Kenny Hotz, Canadian entertainer
Myriam Hernández, Chilean singer
Tim McGraw, American country singer
May 4
Ana Gasteyer, American actress
Ronny Jackson, American politician and physician
Akiko Yajima, Japanese voice actress
May 5
Takehito Koyasu, Japanese voice actor
Bill Ward, English actor
May 8 – Angus Scott, British sports television presenter
May 10 – Nobuhiro Takeda, Japanese footballer and sportscaster
May 11 – Géza Röhrig, Hungarian actor and poet
May 12
Brent Forrester, American writer and producer
Bill Shorten, Australian politician
May 13
Chuck Schuldiner, American singer and guitarist (d. 2001)
Melanie Thornton, American singer (La Bouche) (d. 2001)
May 14 – Tony Siragusa, American football player
May 15
Madhuri Dixit, Indian actress
John Smoltz, American baseball player
May 17 – Greg Florimo, Australian rugby league player and administrator
May 19 – Geraldine Somerville, Irish actress
May 20 – Pavlos, Crown Prince of Greece
May 21 – Chris Benoit, Canadian professional wrestler (d. 2007)
May 22 – Brooke Smith, American actress
May 24
Andrey Borodin, Russian banker
Eric Close, American actor
Heavy D, Jamaican-born American rapper, singer, record producer, and actor (d. 2011)
Bruno Putzulu, French actor
May 25
Poppy Z. Brite, American author
Andrew Sznajder, Canadian tennis player
May 26
Eddie McClintock, American actor
Kristen Pfaff, American bassist (d. 1994)
May 27
Paul Gascoigne, English footballer
Kai Pflaume, German television presenter and game show host
Kristen Skjeldal, Norwegian Olympic skier
May 28 – Glen Rice, American basketball player
May 29 – Noel Gallagher, British musician (Oasis)
May 31 – Sandrine Bonnaire, French actress


=== June ===

June 1 – Roger Sanchez, American DJ
June 3
Anderson Cooper, American television journalist
Tamás Darnyi, Hungarian swimmer
Christopher Walker, Gibraltarian triathlete and cyclist
June 5
Joe DeLoach, American athlete
Ron Livingston, American actor
June 6
Max Casella, American actor
Tristan Gemmill, English actor
Paul Giamatti, American actor
June 7
Olli Mustonen, Finnish pianist and composer
Dave Navarro, American guitarist and singer (Jane's Addiction, Red Hot Chili Peppers)
June 8
Efan Ekoku, Nigerian footballer
Jasmin Tabatabai, German/Iranian actress and musician
June 9 – Rubén Maza, Venezuelan long-distance runner
June 10 – Elizabeth Wettlaufer, Canadian nurse and serial killer
June 15 – Fred Tatasciore, American voice actor
June 16
Jürgen Klopp, German former footballer and former manager of Liverpool F.C.
Ike Shorunmu, Nigerian football goalkeeper
June 19
Bjørn Dæhlie, Norwegian Olympic skier
Mia Sara, American actress
June 20 – Nicole Kidman, American-born Australian actress
June 21 – Yingluck Shinawatra, Thai politician, 28th Prime Minister of Thailand
June 23 – Yoko Minamino, Japanese Idol star and actress
June 24 – Richard Kruspe, German rock musician (Rammstein)
June 26
Kaori Asoh, Japanese voice actress and singer
Luisito Espinosa, Filipino boxer
June 28 – Lars Riedel, German Olympic athlete
June 29
Carl Hester, British dressage rider
Melora Hardin, American actress and singer
June 30
Quốc Bảo, Vietnamese songwriter and record producer
Sture Fladmark, Norwegian football manager and player
Robert Więckiewicz, Polish film and television actor


=== July ===

July 1
Pamela Anderson, Canadian actress and model
Luca Bottale, Italian voice actor
Ritchie Coster, English film, television, and theatre actor
Kim Komando, American talk radio program host
Peter Plate, German musician, singer, songwriter and record producer
July 2
Maïtena Biraben, French-Swiss television presenter and producer
Paul Wekesa, Kenyan tennis player
July 5
Mustafa Al-Kadhimi, Iraqi politician, Prime Minister of Iraq
Silvia Ziche, Italian comics artist
July 6
Wendell Lawrence, Bahamian triple jumper
Heather Nova, Bermudian singer-songwriter
July 7 – Tom Kristensen, Danish racing driver
July 8
Jordan Chan, Hong Kong singer and actor
Henry McKop, Zimbabwean football defender
July 9
Gunnar Axén, Swedish politician
Mark Stoops, American football coach
July 10
Tom Meents, American monster truck driver
Ikki Sawamura, Japanese model, film and television actor, and television presenter
July 11 – Jhumpa Lahiri, British-born Indian-American author
July 12
John Petrucci, American musician
Count Jefferson von Pfeil und Klein-Ellguth
July 13
Benny Benassi, Italian DJ, record producer and remixer
Akira Hokuto, Japanese women's professional wrestler
July 14
Patrick J. Kennedy, American politician
Valérie Pécresse, French politician
Robin Ventura, American baseball player
July 15
Christopher Golden, American novelist
Adam Savage, American TV show host
Michael Tse, Hong Kong actor
July 16
Will Ferrell, American actor, comedian, and screenwriter
Mihaela Stanulet, Romanian artistic gymnast
July 17 – Regina Lund, Swedish actress and singer
July 18 – Vin Diesel, American actor and film producer
July 19
Rageh Omaar, broadcaster
Lee Hsing-wen, Taiwanese actor
July 20
Reed Diamond, American actor
Courtney Taylor-Taylor, American singer-songwriter, frontman of The Dandy Warhols
July 22
Irene Bedard, American actress
Jeremy Callaghan, Papua New Guinean actor
Rhys Ifans, Welsh actor and musician
July 23 – Philip Seymour Hoffman, American actor, director, and producer (d. 2014)
July 25
Matt LeBlanc, American actor
Wendy Raquel Robinson, American actress
Margarita Zavala, Mexican lawyer and politician, First Lady of Mexico
July 26 – Jason Statham, English actor, martial artist, and former diver
July 28
Jakob Augstein, German journalist and publisher
Taka Hirose, Japanese musician (Feeder)
July 30
Marisol Espinoza, Peruvian politician, 1st Vice President of Peru
A. W. Yrjänä, Finnish rock musician and poet
July 31
Rodney Harvey, American actor and model (d. 1998)
Minako Honda, Japanese singer and musical actress (d. 2005)
Elizabeth Wurtzel, author and feminist (d. 2020)


=== August ===

August 2 – Aaron Krickstein, American tennis player
August 3
Mathieu Kassovitz, French movie director and actor
Ida Mahmudah, Indonesian politician
August 4 – Arbaaz Khan, Indian actor
August 5
Vladyslav Gorai, Ukrainian tenor
Patrick Baumann, Swiss basketball executive and player and coach (d. 2018)
August 7 – Charlotte Lewis, English actress
August 8
Yūki Amami, Japanese actress
Sable, American wrestler, model and actress
August 9 – Deion Sanders, American pro football and baseball player
August 10 – Riddick Bowe, American boxer
August 11
Enrique Bunbury, Spanish singer-songwriter
Collin Chou, Taiwanese martial arts actor
Joe Rogan, American comedian and television host
August 12
Andy Hui, Hong Kong singer and actor
Emil Kostadinov, Bulgarian football player
Regilio Tuur, Dutch boxer
August 13
Amélie Nothomb, Belgian writer
Jeanine Áñez, President of Bolivia
August 15 – Brahim Boutayeb, Moroccan long-distance runner
August 16
Mark Coyne, Australian rugby league player
Ulrika Jonsson, Swedish-born television personality
Pamela Smart, American murderer
August 18 – Daler Mehndi, Indian singer
August 19 – Satya Nadella, Indian-American businessman and current CEO of Microsoft
August 21
Carrie-Anne Moss, Canadian actress
Serj Tankian, Lebanese-born singer (System of a Down)
August 22
Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje, Nigerian-British actor and model
Ty Burrell, American actor and comedian
Yukiko Okada, Japanese idol singer (d. 1986)
Layne Staley, American rock musician (Alice in Chains) (d. 2002)
August 25
Tom Hollander, English actor
Eckart von Hirschhausen, German physician and comedian
August 26
Michael Gove, British politician
August 27 – Ogie Alcasid, Filipino singer-songwriter, comedian, parodist, and actor
August 28 – Masaaki Endoh, Japanese singer
August 29
Neil Gorsuch, Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court since 2017
Anton Newcombe, American musician (The Brian Jonestown Massacre)
August 30 – Frederique van der Wal, Dutch supermodel


=== September ===

September 3
Daron Acemoglu, Turkish-born economist
Drena De Niro, American actress
Luis Gonzalez, American baseball player
September 5
Kōichi Morishita, Japanese long-distance runner
Arnel Pineda, Filipino singer-songwriter (Journey)
Matthias Sammer, German football player
Jane Sixsmith, English field hockey player
September 6 – Macy Gray, African-American urban musician
September 9 – Akshay Kumar, Indian actor
September 11 – Harry Connick Jr., American singer and actor
September 12
Louis C.K., American comedian and actor
Rob Renzetti, American animator and director
September 13
Michael Johnson, American sprinter
Tim "Ripper" Owens, American rock singer (Judas Priest, Iced Earth, Yngwie Malmsteen)
September 16 – Alain Claude Bilie By Nze, Gabonese politician, 13th Prime Minister of Gabon
September 18 – Tara Fitzgerald, British actress
September 19 – Aleksandr Karelin, Russian Greco-Roman wrestler
September 20 – Kristen Johnston, American actress
September 21 – Faith Hill, American country singer
September 22 – Félix Savón, Cuban boxer
September 23
Masashi Nakayama, Japanese footballer
Jenna Stern, American actress
September 25
Melissa De Sousa, American actress
Audrey Wasilewski, American actress and voice actress
September 28
Mira Sorvino, American actress
Moon Zappa, American actress, musician and author
September 30 – Andrea Roth, Canadian actress


=== October ===

October 2
Frankie Fredericks, Namibian athlete
Lew Temple, American actor
Gillian Welch, American country singer-songwriter
October 3
Jay Taylor, American basketball player (d. 1998)
Tiara Jacquelina, Malaysian actress
Rob Liefeld, American author and illustrator
Denis Villeneuve, Canadian film director and writer
October 4 – Liev Schreiber, American actor and film director
October 5 – Guy Pearce, English-born Australian actor
October 6
Bruno Bichir, Mexican actor
Sergi López Segú, Spanish footballer (d. 2006)
October 7
Toni Braxton, American R&B singer
María Corina Machado, Venezuelan politician, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize
October 9
Maurice Banach, German footballer (d. 1991)
Eddie Guerrero, Mexican-American professional wrestler (d. 2005)
October 10 – Gavin Newsom, American politician, 40th Governor of California
October 11
Artie Lange, American actor, comedian and radio personality
Peter Thiel, German-American entrepreneur and venture capitalist
October 13
Trevor Hoffman, American Major League Baseball player
Hannu Lintu, Finnish conductor
Javier Sotomayor, Cuban high jumper
Kate Walsh, American actress
October 16 – Davina McCall, British TV presenter and UK Big Brother host
October 17
René Dif, Danish-Algerian singer (Aqua)
Nathalie Tauziat, French tennis player
October 18 – Eric Stuart, American voice actor, singer, and voice director
October 19 – Yōji Matsuda, Japanese actor and voice actor
October 20
Kerrod Walters, Australian rugby league player
Kevin Walters, Australian rugby league player and coach
October 21 – Pam Rehm, American poet
October 22
Salvatore Di Vittorio, Italian composer-conductor
Ulrike Maier, Austrian alpine skier (d. 1994)
Carlos Mencia, Latino-American actor and standup comedian
October 24 – Jacqueline McKenzie, Australian actress
October 27 – Scott Weiland, American musician (d. 2015)
October 28
Julia Roberts, American actress
Sophie, Hereditary Princess of Liechtenstein
October 29
Joely Fisher, American actress
Péter Kun, Hungarian guitarist (d. 1993)
Rufus Sewell, English actor
Beth Chapman, American bounty hunter (d. 2019)
October 30 – Ty Detmer, American NFL quarterback; 1990 Heisman Trophy winner
October 31
Vanilla Ice, American rapper
Buddy Lazier, American race car driver


=== November ===

November 1 – Tina Arena, Australian singer-songwriter
November 2
Akira Ishida, Japanese voice actor
Scott Walker, American legislator and politician; 45th Governor of Wisconsin (2011–2019)
November 5 – Judy Reyes, American actress
November 6
Pervin Buldan, Turkish-Kurdish politician
Rebecca Schaeffer, American actress (d. 1989)
November 7
David Guetta, French DJ and record producer
Sharleen Spiteri, Scottish singer-songwriter
November 8 – Courtney Thorne-Smith, American actress
November 11 – Gil de Ferran, Brazilian race car driver (d. 2023)
November 13
Juhi Chawla, Indian actress, model, and film producer
Jimmy Kimmel, American comedian and talk show host
November 15 – François Ozon, French writer and director
November 16 – Lisa Bonet, American actress
November 20 – Teoman, Turkish rock singer and songwriter
November 22
Boris Becker, German tennis player
Mark Ruffalo, American actor
Bart Veldkamp, Dutch-born speed skater
November 23 – Salli Richardson, American actress
November 25 – Anthony Nesty, Surinamese swimmer
November 28 – Anna Nicole Smith, American model and actress (d. 2007)


=== December ===

December 1
Néstor Carbonell, American actor, director and screenwriter
Reggie Sanders, American Major League Baseball outfielder
December 4 – Adamski, English dance music producer
December 5 – Knez, Montenegrin singer
December 6 – Judd Apatow, American screenwriter and producer
December 8 – Kotono Mitsuishi, Japanese voice actress
December 9
Joshua Bell, American violinist
Caryn Kadavy, American figure skater
December 11 – Mo'Nique, African-American actress and comedian
December 13 – Jamie Foxx, African-American actor and singer
December 14 – Hanne Haugland, Norwegian high jumper
December 16
Donovan Bailey, Canadian athlete
Miranda Otto, Australian actress
December 17 – Gigi D'Agostino, Italian musician and DJ
December 19
Criss Angel, American musician, magician, illusionist, escapologist and stunt performer
Charles Austin, American Olympic athlete
December 21 – Mikheil Saakashvili, Georgian politician, 3rd President of Georgia and Governor of Odessa Oblast
December 22
Richey Edwards, Welsh musician (d. 1995)
Dan Petrescu, Romanian footballer
December 23 – Carla Bruni, Italian-French model, singer-songwriter and First Lady of France


== Deaths ==


=== January ===

January 3
Mary Garden, Scottish-American opera singer (b. 1874)
Jack Ruby, American nightclub owner and convicted criminal, best known as the killer of Lee Harvey Oswald (b. 1911)
January 4 – Donald Campbell, English water and land speed record seeker (b. 1921)
January 9 – Waldo Frank, American novelist and historian (b. 1889)
January 12 – Holland Smith, American general (b. 1882)
January 14 – Miklós Kállay, 34th Prime Minister of Hungary (b. 1887)
January 17
Evelyn Nesbit, American actress and model (b. 1884)
Barney Ross, American boxer (b. 1909)
Al Sheehan, American entertainment businessman and radio host (b. 1899)
January 21 – Ann Sheridan, American actress (b. 1915)
January 23 – Holcombe Ward, American tennis player (b. 1878)
January 24 – Luigi Federzoni, Italian Fascist politician (b. 1878)
January 27
Crew of Apollo 1 (launch pad fire):
Ed White, American astronaut (b. 1930)
Gus Grissom, American astronaut (b. 1926)
Roger Chaffee, American astronaut (b. 1935)
David Maxwell Fyfe, 1st Earl of Kilmuir, British politician, lawyer, and judge (b. 1900)
Alphonse Juin, Marshal of France (b. 1888)
Luigi Tenco, Italian singer-songwriter (b. 1938)
January 28 – Leonhard Seppala, Norwegian-American sled dog breeder, trainer and musher (b. 1877)
January 31 – Eddie Tolan, American athlete (b. 1908)


=== February ===

February 3 – Joe Meek, English record producer and sound engineer (b. 1929)
February 6
Martine Carol, French actress (b. 1920)
Henry Morgenthau Jr., United States Secretary of the Treasury during World War II (b. 1891)
February 7 – David Unaipon, Australian author and inventor (b. 1872)
February 8 – Victor Gollancz, British publisher (b. 1893)
February 13 – Abelardo L. Rodríguez, substitute president of Mexico (1932–1934) (b. 1889)
February 14
Forough Farrokhzad, Iranian poet, writer and filmmaker (b. 1934)
Sig Ruman, German actor (b. 1884)
February 15 – Antonio Moreno, Spanish actor (b. 1887)
February 16 – Smiley Burnette, American actor (b. 1911)
February 17 – Ciro Alegría, Peruvian journalist, politician, and novelist (b. 1909)
February 18 – J. Robert Oppenheimer, American physicist (b. 1904)
February 21 – Charles Beaumont, American writer (b. 1929)
February 24 – Franz Waxman, German-American composer (b. 1906)
February 28 – Henry Luce, American publisher (b. 1898)


=== March ===

March 2
Gordon Harker, English actor (b. 1885)
José Martínez Ruiz, 'Azorín', Spanish writer (b. 1873)
March 5
Mischa Auer, Russian-born actor (b. 1905)
Mohammad Mosaddegh, Iranian politician, 35th Prime Minister of Iran (b. 1882)
Mbah Suro, Indonesian shaman and mystic (b. 1921)
Georges Vanier, Canadian Governor General (b. 1888)
March 6
Nelson Eddy, American singer and actor (b. 1901)
Zoltán Kodály, Hungarian composer (b. 1882)
March 7 – Alice B. Toklas, American personality (b. 1877)
March 11 – Geraldine Farrar, American soprano (b. 1882)
March 23 – Pete Johnson, American boogie-woogie and jazz pianist, songwriter (b. 1904)
March 25 – Johannes Itten, Swiss painter (b. 1888)
March 27 – Jaroslav Heyrovský, Czech chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1890)
March 30 – Jean Toomer, American writer (b. 1894)
March 31
Don Alvarado, American actor (b. 1904)
Rodion Malinovsky, Soviet military commander and Minister of Defence (b. 1898)


=== April ===

April 5 – Hermann Joseph Muller, American geneticist, recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (b. 1890)
April 13 – Luis Somoza Debayle, 26th President of Nicaragua (b. 1922)
April 15 – Totò, Italian actor (b. 1898)
April 17 – Red Allen, American jazz trumpeter (b. 1908)
April 18 – Friedrich Heiler, German theologian and historian (b. 1892)
April 19
Konrad Adenauer, German statesman, first Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany (b. 1876)
William Boyle, 12th Earl of Cork, British admiral of the fleet (b. 1873)
April 22 – Tom Conway, British actor (b. 1904)
April 23 – Edgar Neville, Spanish playwright and film director (b. 1899)
April 24 – Vladimir Komarov, Soviet cosmonaut (b. 1927)
April 25 – Joseph Boxhall, British sailor, fourth officer of the RMS Titanic (b. 1884)
April 27 – William Douglas Cook, New Zealand founder of Eastwoodhill Arboretum and Pukeiti (b. 1884)
April 29 – Anthony Mann, American actor and director (b. 1906)


=== May ===

May 6 – Zhou Zuoren, Chinese writer (b. 1885)
May 7
Anne Bauchens, American film editor (b. 1882)
Judith Evelyn, American actress (b. 1909)
May 8
Laverne Andrews, American singer (b. 1911)
Elmer Rice, American playwright (b. 1892)
May 10 – Lorenzo Bandini, Italian Formula One driver (b. 1935)
May 12 – John Masefield, English poet and novelist (b. 1878)
May 13 – Lance Sharkey, Australian Communist leader (b. 1898)
May 15 – Edward Hopper, American painter (b. 1882)
May 18 – Andy Clyde, Scottish actor (b. 1892)
May 20 – Bosman di Ravelli, South African concert pianist, composer, and writer (b. 1882)
May 21
Géza Lakatos, Hungarian general and politician, 36th Prime Minister of Hungary (b. 1890)
Rexhep Mitrovica, Albanian politician, 18th Prime Minister of Albania (b. 1888)
May 22
Langston Hughes, American writer, novelist, playwright, and columnist (b. 1901)
Josip Plemelj, Slovene mathematician (b. 1873)
May 27 – Tilly Edinger, German-born American scientist, founder of paleoneurology (b. 1897)
May 29 – Georg Wilhelm Pabst, Austrian film director (b. 1885)
May 30 – Claude Rains, British actor (b. 1889)
May 31 – Billy Strayhorn, American composer and pianist (b. 1915)


=== June ===

June 2 – Ivan Miller, Canadian journalist and sportscaster (b. 1898)
June 3 – Arthur Tedder, 1st Baron Tedder, British air force officer, Marshal of the Royal Air Force (b. 1890)
June 5 – Arthur Biram, Israeli philosopher and educator, and Israel Prize recipient (b. 1878)
June 6 – Edward Givens, American astronaut (b. 1930)
June 7 – Dorothy Parker, American writer (b. 1893)
June 10 – Spencer Tracy, American actor (b. 1900)
June 11 – Wolfgang Köhler, German psychologist (b. 1887)
June 13
Gerald Patterson, Australian tennis champion (b. 1895)
Sir Edward Ellington, British military officer; Marshal of the Royal Air Force (b. 1877)
June 14 – Eddie Eagan, American sportsman (b. 1897)
June 16 – Reginald Denny, English actor (b. 1891)
June 26 – Françoise Dorléac, French actress (b. 1942)
June 29
Primo Carnera, Italian boxer (b. 1906)
Jayne Mansfield, American actress (b. 1933)


=== July ===

July 1 – Gerhard Ritter, German historian (b. 1888)
July 8 – Vivien Leigh, English actress (b. 1913)
July 9
Eugen Fischer, German professor of medicine, anthropology and eugenics (b. 1874)
Fatima Jinnah, Pakistan's "Mother of the Nation" (b. 1893)
July 13 – Tommy Lucchese, Italian-American gangster (b. 1899)
July 14 – Tudor Arghezi, Romanian writer (b. 1880)
July 17
Cyril Ring, American film actor (b. 1892)
John Coltrane, American jazz saxophonist (b. 1926)
July 18 – Humberto de Alencar Castelo Branco, 26th President of Brazil (plane crash) (b. 1897)
July 19 – John T. McNaughton, United States Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (plane crash) (b. 1921)
July 20 – Lewis H. Brereton, American aviation pioneer and air force general (b. 1890)
July 21
Jimmie Foxx, American baseball player (Philadelphia Athletics) and member of the MLB Hall of Fame (b. 1907)
Albert Luthuli, South African politician, recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize (b. 1898)
Basil Rathbone, British actor (b. 1892)
July 22 – Carl Sandburg, American poet (b. 1878)
July 31 – Richard Kuhn, Austrian chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1900)


=== August ===

August 1
Richard Kuhn, Austrian chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1900)
Adrien Arcand, Canadian politician (b. 1899)
August 9
Joe Orton, English playwright (b. 1933)
Anton Walbrook, Austrian actor (b. 1896)
August 13 – Jane Darwell, American actress (b. 1879)
August 15
Luis A. Eguiguren, Peruvian historian and politician (b. 1887)
René Magritte, Belgian painter (b. 1898)
Manuel Prado Ugarteche, 50th & 54th President of Peru (b. 1889)
August 19
Isaac Deutscher, British Marxist historian (b. 1907)
Hugo Gernsback, Luxembourg-born editor and publisher (b. 1884)
August 22 – Gregory G. Pincus, American biologist and researcher (b. 1903)
August 23 – Nathaniel Cartmell, American Olympic athlete (b. 1883)
August 24 – Henry J. Kaiser, American industrialist (b. 1882)
August 25
Stanley Bruce, 8th Prime Minister of Australia (b. 1883)
Paul Muni, American actor (b. 1895)
George Lincoln Rockwell, American Nazi Party leader (b. 1918)
August 27 – Brian Epstein, English band manager (The Beatles) (b. 1934)
August 30
Samuel Mosberg, American boxer, Olympic champion (b. 1896)
Ad Reinhardt, American painter (b. 1913)
August 31
Ilya Ehrenburg, Russian writer (b. 1891)
Mikhail Kovalyov, Soviet general (b. 1897)


=== September ===

September 1
James Dunn, American actor (b. 1901)
Ilse Koch, Nazi German war criminal (b. 1906)
Siegfried Sassoon, British poet (b. 1886)
September 2 – Francis Ouimet, American professional golfer (b. 1893)
September 8 – Juliusz Rómmel, Polish general (b. 1881)
September 12 – Vladimir Bartol, Slovene author (b. 1903)
September 13 – Varian Fry, American journalist (b. 1907)
September 16 – Pavlo Tychyna, Ukrainian poet, translator, publicist, public activist, academician, and statesman. (b. 1891)
September 18 – Sir John Cockcroft, English physicist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1897)
September 27 – Prince Felix Yusupov, Russian assassin of Rasputin (b. 1887)
September 29 – Carson McCullers, American writer (b. 1917)


=== October ===

October 3
Woody Guthrie, American folk musician (b. 1912)
Sir Malcolm Sargent, English conductor (b. 1895)
October 5 – Clifton Williams, American astronaut (b. 1932)
October 7 – Sir Norman Angell, British politician, recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize (b. 1872)
October 8 – Clement Attlee, British politician, 60th Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (b. 1883)
October 9
Gordon Allport, American psychologist (b. 1897)
Che Guevara, Argentine communist revolutionary (b. 1928)
Sir Cyril Hinshelwood, English chemist, Nobel Prize laureate (b. 1897)
André Maurois, French author (b. 1885)
Joseph Pilates, German physical culturist and developer of Pilates (b. 1883)
Edith Storey, American actress (b. 1892)
October 12 – Nat Pendleton, American actor and Olympic wrestler (b. 1895)
October 14 – Marcel Aymé, French writer (b. 1902)
October 17 – Puyi, last Emperor of China (b. 1906)
October 20 – Shigeru Yoshida, Japanese diplomat and politician, 32nd Prime Minister of Japan (b. 1878)
October 21 – Ejnar Hertzsprung, Danish chemist and astronomer (b. 1873)
October 29 – Julien Duvivier, French film director (b. 1896)
October 30 – Charles Trowbridge, American actor (b. 1882)


=== November ===

November 7 – John Nance Garner, 32nd Vice President of the United States (b. 1868)
November 9 – Charles Bickford, American actor (b. 1891)
November 13 – Harriet Cohen, English pianist (b. 1895)
November 15 – Alice Lake, American actress (b. 1895)
November 19 – Casimir Funk, Polish biochemist (b. 1884)
November 20 – Józef Skoczyński, Polish Roman Catholic priest and social activist (b. 1903)
November 21 – Florence Reed, American actress (b. 1883)
November 25 – Ossip Zadkine, Russian sculptor, painter and lithographer (b. 1888)
November 26 – Albert Warner, American film producer (b. 1884)
November 28 – Léon M'ba, 1st president of Gabon (b. 1902)
November 29 – Ferenc Münnich, 47th prime minister of Hungary (b. 1886)


=== December ===

December 4
Daniel Jones, British phonetician (b. 1881)
Bert Lahr, American actor (b. 1895)
December 8 – Robert Henry Lawrence Jr., American astronaut (b. 1935)
December 10 – Otis Redding, American singer (b. 1941)
December 11
Howard Freeman, American actor (b. 1899)
Victor de Sabata, Italian conductor and composer (b. 1892)
December 17 – Harold Holt, 17th Prime Minister of Australia (body never found) (b. 1908)
December 21
Stuart Erwin, American actor (b. 1903)
Ejnar Hertzsprung, Danish chemist and astronomer (b. 1873)
December 26 – Sydney Barnes, English cricketer (b. 1873)
December 28 – Katharine McCormick, American suffragist (b. 1875)
December 29 – Paul Whiteman, American bandleader (b. 1890)
December 30 – Vincent Massey, Canadian Governor General (b. 1887)


=== Date unknown ===
Fathollah Khan Akbar, Iranian cabinet minister, 17th Prime Minister of Iran (b. 1878)


== Nobel Prizes ==

Physics – Hans Bethe
Chemistry – Manfred Eigen, Ronald George Wreyford Norrish, George Porter
Physiology or Medicine – Ragnar Granit, Haldan Keffer Hartline, George Wald
Literature – Miguel Ángel Asturias
Peace – not awarded


== References ==


== Sources ==
1967 – Headlines A report from Michael Wallace of WCBS Newsradio 880 (WCBS-AM New York) Part of WCBS 880's celebration of 40 years of newsradio.
1967 – The Year in Sound An Audiofile produced by Lou Zambrana of WCBS Newsradio 880 (WCBS-AM New York) Part of WCBS 880's celebration of 40 years of newsradio.
Everything you want to know about the Expo 67