Eindhoven Airport (IATA: EIN, ICAO: EHEH) is an international airport located 7.6 km (4.7 mi) west of Eindhoven, Netherlands. In terms of the number of served passengers, it is the second largest airport in the Netherlands, with 6.8 million passengers in 2023. The airport is used by both civilian and military traffic.


== History ==


=== Early years ===
The airport was founded in 1932 as a grass strip under the name Vliegveld Welschap (Welschap Airfield). In 1939, the airfield was acquired for use by the Air Force, as concerns over a military conflict with Germany increased. The airfield was quickly captured by German forces during the Battle of the Netherlands and re-used by them under the name Fliegerhorst Eindhoven. 
The airfield was returned to the Royal Netherlands Air Force in 1952. It was home to crews flying the Republic F-84 Thunderjet, Republic F-84F Thunderstreak, Northrop NF-5A/B, and finally the General Dynamics F-16A/B Fighting Falcon. 316 Squadron flew the F-16 and was inactivated in April 1994.


=== Development since the 1980s ===
In 1984, a terminal building for civilian air traffic was constructed, based on a Leo de Bever design. After the end of the Cold War, Eindhoven was transformed into a military transport base. Initially it was home to F27-300M Troopship aircraft. Over the years, Fokker 50, Fokker 60, McDonnell Douglas KDC-10, Lockheed C-130 Hercules and Gulfstream IV aircraft were stationed at the air base. The Fokker and KDC-10 aircraft have now been retired.
On 15 July 1996, a Belgian Air Force C-130H Hercules crashed at the airport – known as the "Hercules disaster" (Dutch: Herculesramp). The plane caught fire and 34 people died in the intense heat. Communication problems within the emergency services meant that fire services were not aware the C-130 carried many passengers, which likely caused more deaths.
On the civilian side, the airport has continued to grow and is now the second-largest airport in the Netherlands. To accommodate this, in early 2012 work to expand Eindhoven airport was started including the addition of a 120-room Tulip Inn Hotel.
In October 2018, Ryanair announced it would be closing its base at the airport on 5 November 2018. Construction of a 4 star Holiday Inn hotel was started in 2018; the hotel opened in 2019.
In 2021, the airport announced a terminal extension will be built from 2025, expanding the terminal from 27,300 square metres (294,000 sq ft) to 35,000 square metres (380,000 sq ft).


== Facilities ==
Passenger facilities include: exchange office, lost property office, luggage lockers, baby changing area, health centre, and various shops such as Rituals, AH to GO, Victoria's Secret, and tax free shops: Travel Plaza and Travel luxury; and also a new Business Lounge: Aspire by Swissport
Eindhoven Airport also has a variety of restaurants, bars and cafes, such as: Upstairs (the Tulip Inn Hotel bar), La Place, The Bar (a flagship of Bavaria beer), McDonalds and Starbucks (both before and after the security check).
The airport also has a business centre. There are 1,500 parking spaces for long and short term parking.


== Military ==
334 Squadron with Airbus A330-MRTT & Gulfstream G650
336 Squadron with Lockheed C-130
940 Maintenance Support Squadron
941 Miscellaneous Support Squadron
Movement Coordination Centre Europe
European Air Transport Command
From 1 July 2007, Eindhoven has been the location of the Movement Coordination Centre Europe (MCCE), a merger of the former European Airlift Centre (EAC), established by the European Air Group, and the Sea-lift Coordination Centre (SCC). MCCE is a non-NATO/non-European military organization. MCCE is an organization open to all governments whose membership is accepted by all the other participant nations, regulated by a specific legal technical agreement. The mission of the MCCE is to coordinate the use of air transport, surface transport (sea and land) and air-to-air refuelling (AAR) capabilities between participating nations, and thereby improve the overall efficiency of the use of owned or leased assets of the national military organizations. The centre's main focus will be on strategic movements, but not exclude operational and tactical movements.
Since September 2010, Eindhoven Airport has hosted the European Air Transport Command, made up of seven European nations which share aerial military assets in a single operative command. EATC will play a leading role in the A400M standardization process.


== Airlines and destinations ==
The following airlines operate regular scheduled and charter flights to and from Eindhoven:


== Statistics ==


== Ground transport ==
Eindhoven Airport is located just off the A2 motorway. The airport is also served by multiple bus services:

Bravo Line 400 is a shuttle bus service line that connects the airport to Eindhoven Centraal railway station.
Bravo Line 401 is a bus rapid transit line that connects the airport to Eindhoven's city centre and Eindhoven Centraal railway station.
Bravo Line 20 is a regional bus service that connects the airport to Best, Best railway station, Veldhoven and the High Tech Campus Eindhoven.
KLM Bus connects Eindhoven Airport to Amsterdam Airport Schiphol for KLM passengers
Flixbus connects the airport to Paris, Brussels, Antwerp and Amsterdam.
AmsEindShuttle connects the airport to Amsterdam city centre.


== See also ==
Transport in the Netherlands
List of airports in the Netherlands


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Eindhoven Airport at Wikimedia Commons

Official website
Current weather for EHEH at NOAA/NWS
Accident history for EIN at Aviation Safety Network