During the Soviet era, hundreds of intelligence and state security officers defected to a foreign power. Their motivations varied, from fear of arrest, to dissatisfaction with the tasks assigned to them, to a change of heart about the regime they served.
While there were defections in the other direction too, the number from the Soviet Union and Soviet Bloc was significantly greater. This was particularly true of intelligence and state security personnel.
To defect, a Soviet officer needed to make contact with a foreign power. A Soviet officer had three ways to do that. 1) A defector could approach a foreign power while already outside the Soviet Union on official business, like diplomatic cover.  2) A defector could cross a border to a country neighboring the Soviet Union and request asylum. 3) Unique to World War II, when a foreign power—German troops—occupied large portions of Soviet territory, a defector could approach a foreign power that came to him or her. Intelligence and state security officer defectors used all three methods over the course of Soviet history.
Many Soviet intelligence and state security defectors are relatively obscure. Before World War II, Soviet officers often were discussed only in Europe-based Russian émigré newspapers. In the immediate aftermath of World War II, the United States and United Kingdom, which were the primary recipients of Soviet intelligence and state security officer defectors, did not publicize defections as broadly.
After Stalin’s death in 1953, intelligence and state security officer defectors became more prominent and were offered public forums, such as press conferences and publication venues to reveal their stories. That resulted in prominent defectors like Nikolay Khokhlov, Petr Deryabin, and the Vladimir and Yevdokiya Petrov.
The rush of Soviet intelligence and state security officer defectors that followed Stalin’s death waned in the late 1950s, settling to a few per year until the Soviet regime was approaching its end in the 1980s. The late 1980s and early 1990s saw another wave of intelligence and state security officer defectors, as they became disgruntled with the tasks they were given to perform.
Although post-Soviet Russian laws changed, opening the opportunity to travel abroad freely, intelligence and state security officers still faced restrictions preventing them from traveling abroad. Thus, the defection of intelligence and state security officers has continued, even accelerating since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022.
The following is a list of Soviet intelligence and state security officers and agents who have defected.


== See also ==
List of Cold War pilot defections
List of GRU defectors
List of Soviet and Eastern Bloc defectors
Petrov Affair
Soviet Defectors Database


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Richelson, Jeffrey. (1999). The U.S. Intelligence Community: Fourth Edition [Book]. WestView Press, ISBN 978-0-8133-6893-1