Mikhail Petrovich Suslov (Russian: Михаил Петрович Суслов; 23 March 1939 – 5 March 2024), also known as Misha Suslov (Russian: Миша Суслов), was a Russian cinematographer.


== Life and career ==
Suslov was born in the USSR. In 1962 he graduated from the camera department of VGIK (workshop of Leonid Kosmatov). For three years he worked on Moscow television, where the creative association "Ekran" was being created. He filmed pop performances by Joseph Kobzon, Maya Kristalinskaya, and Muslim Magomayev. He mastered the production of short feature films and television programs.
Then he moved to the Mosfilm studio. He participated in the creation of several films, among which the historical-revolutionary film The Sixth of July, directed by Yuli Karasik, which stands out for its strict ascetic style.
Moving to the United States in 1976, in Hollywood, he worked mainly in the genres of action and crime drama, including Black Moon Rising and Champion.
Suslov worked with director John Hancock for Steal the Sky, Prancer, A Piece of Eden, Suspended Animation, The Looking Glass, and The Girls of Summer. Suslov's camerawork in the drama film Prancer added sincerity to the story of a girl finding a reindeer she believes is Santa's.
From the late 1990s, he worked regularly in Russia, including fruitfully collaborating with director Sergei Ursuliak, filming Long Farewell, Poirot's Failure, Liquidation, Isaev, Life and Fate, and And Quiet Flows the Don.
Suslov died on 5 March 2024, at the age of 84.


== Filmography ==


== Awards ==
2005 –  Moskvin Prize at the film festival "Literature and Cinema" in Gatchina for the film Long Farewell
2008 – TEFI Award in the nomination the  cinematographer of a television feature film/series  for Liquidation
2013 – Professional award of the Association of Film and Television Producers in the field of television cinema in the nomination For the best camera work (TV series Life and Fate)
2015 – Professional award of the Association of Film and Television Producers in the field of television cinema in the nomination For the best camera work (TV series Quiet Don)


== References ==


== External links ==
Misha Suslov at IMDb