Animal Farm is a 1999 political comedy-drama television film directed by John Stephenson and written by Alan Janes. Based on the 1945 novel of the same name by George Orwell and serving as an allegory of the Russian Revolution and its aftermath, the film is also a live-action remake of the 1954 animated film of the same name. The film features an ensemble cast including Kelsey Grammer, Ian Holm, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Patrick Stewart, Julia Ormond, Paul Scofield, Charles Dale, Pete Postlethwaite, Alan Stanford and Peter Ustinov. Jim Henson's Creature Shop provided the film's animatronic animals. In the film, a group of anthropomorphic animals revolt successfully against their human owner, only to slide into a more brutal tyranny among themselves when an evil pig takes control of the farm.


== Plot ==
While Mr. Jones, the owner of Manor Farm, invites the Pilkingtons to a gathering to talk about his debts, the animals gather in a meeting where Old Major, the Middle White boar, explains that humanity is their enemy and that they can overthrow the humans with revolution, calling for a life of equality and prosperity. Major teaches them a song called "Beasts of the World", but while the animals are singing, Jones, hearing the noise coming from the barn, goes to investigate, only to accidentally shoot and kill Major with a shotgun.
Jones goes into town for a drink without feeding the animals. Upon returning, Boxer, Manor Farm's shire horse, helps the animals break into the food shed. They accidentally awaken Jones, but the animals quickly chase him, his wife and men off the farm and into town.
A Large White boar named Snowball takes control of Manor Farm, renaming it "Animal Farm" and putting down the Seven Commandments of "Animalism". Meanwhile, a border collie named Jessie gives birth to puppies. Napoleon, a Berkshire boar, and Squealer, a Tamworth boar, call for a secret meeting in which he has Pincher, a rottweiler, swear loyalty to them, and gets hold of Jessie's puppies to train up. The pigs secretly begin hoarding apples and milk for themselves.
Determined to prevent revolution from spreading to other farms, Pilkington leads an invasion into Animal Farm with some villagers and locals led by Frederick. Snowball has planned for this and the animals launch a counter-attack. The men flee. Pilkington considers working with the animals.
Snowball's plans to build a windmill to better the animals' lives are opposed by Napoleon, who summons Jessie's now-grown puppies to chase Snowball out of the farm. Napoleon decrees the pigs will decide the future, and the animals begin to build the windmill. Pilkington learns that some of the animals can speak English and that they can trade. Jessie tells the others that she saw the pigs living in the farmhouse and sleeping in the beds; it turns out Napoleon  and Squealer altered the sleeping in beds commandment. Later that night at the Red Lion Inn, Pilkington laughs at how he's been taking advantage of Napoleon's inexperience, selling him cheap farm equipment.
Napoleon blames Jones and his wife blowing up the windmill on Snowball, and the hens will have to surrender their eggs to the market because of a food shortage. When the hens oppose, Napoleon makes feeding a hen punishable by death. Napoleon's second-in-command, Squealer begins making propaganda films, while the alcohol and killing commandments are altered into "no animal shall drink alcohol to excess" and "no animal shall kill another animal without cause".
During the rebuilding of the windmill, Boxer is injured. When the time comes for Boxer to be transported, Jessie and Benjamin, a wise donkey, suddenly realize that the van taking him away is from the glue factory. Napoleon is paid by Pilkington for selling Boxer to the glue factory. That night, Jessie watches as Pilkington and his wife dine with the pigs in the farmhouse. Napoleon reverts the farm's name to Manor Farm. While watching the meeting through the warped window, Jessie sees that Napoleon and Pilkington's faces have become so alike, she cannot tell the difference between them. Muriel the goat and Benjamin notice that the final commandment, "All animals are equal", has been extended to include "but some animals are more equal than others". Now seeing Napoleon and Squealer are no better than Jones and Pilkington, Jessie, Benjamin, Muriel, and some of the other animals escape.
Years later, the escaped animals return and investigate the remains of Manor Farm, having long collapsed following the end of Napoleon's reign of terror. They find Napoleon and Squealer are dead, having perished from their own dictation, though a few animals have survived the fall, including Jessie's puppies, who all recognize her as their mother. Later, Jessie finds that a new family has purchased the farm (though it is unknown what happened to Mr. Jones and his wife), and vows to help them avoid the mistakes of Jones and Napoleon.


== Cast ==
The cast is as follows:

Pete Postlethwaite as Jones
Caroline Gray as Mrs. Jones
Alan Stanford as Pilkington
Gail Fitzpatrick as Mrs. Pilkington
Gerard Walsh as Mr. Frederick


=== Voices ===
The voice cast is:

Julia Ormond as Jessie, a border collie
Kelsey Grammer as Snowball, a Large White boar who leads the revolution.
Patrick Stewart as Napoleon, a Berkshire boar who rises to power at Animal Farm
Ian Holm as Squealer, a Tamworth boar and Napoleon's aide.
Paul Scofield as Boxer, a shire stallion
Pete Postlethwaite as Benjamin, a donkey
Julia Louis-Dreyfus as Mollie, a grey Andalusian mare
Jean Beith as Muriel, a Saanen goat
Peter Ustinov as Old Major, an elderly Middle White boar who inspires the animals' rebellion
Charles Dale as:
Moses, a raven
Pincher, a Rottweiler


== Production ==
Filming began on 25 August 1998 and ended on 6 November. 
Animals were built to represent the titular characters of Animal Farm at Jim Henson's Creature Shop in London: four pigs (Old Major, Snowball, Napoleon, and Squealer), a shire horse (Boxer), two mares (Mollie and an unnamed black horse that is implied to be Clover), a Border collie (Jessie), a rottweiler (Pincher), a donkey (Benjamin), a raven (Moses), a goat (Muriel), a flock of sheep, cows, a rat, chickens, ducks and pigeons.


== Reception ==
The film won Best Special Effects and was nominated for best film in the 2000s Fantasporto International Fantasy Film Award.
The film's director John Stephenson was nominated for Starboy Award in the 2000s Oulu International Children's and Youth Film Festival.


== Release ==


=== Home media ===
Released on VHS and DVD on January 18, 2000 by Artisan Home Entertainment.
Re-released on a 2-disc DVD set paired with Moby Dick on December 28, 2010 by Vivendi Visual Entertainment.


== References ==


== External links ==

Animal Farm at IMDb