The Apple Wassail or Orchard Wassail is a traditional form of wassailing practiced in the cider orchards of Southern England during the winter, on either Twelfth Night (5 or 6 January) or Old Twelfth Night ("Old Twelvey", 17 January). There are many well recorded instances of the Apple Wassail in the early modern period. The first recorded mention was at Fordwich, Kent, in 1585, by which time groups of young men would go between orchards performing the rite for a reward. Among the most famous wassail ceremonies are those in Whimple, Devon and Carhampton, Somerset, both on Old Twelfth Night, 17 January. The practice was sometimes referred to as "howling". 
There are also many new revival wassails springing up all over the West Country and further afield, such as those in Stoke Gabriel and Sandford, Devon. Clevedon in north Somerset holds an annual Wassailing event in the Clevedon Community Orchard, combining the traditional elements of the festival with the entertainment and music of the Bristol Morris Men and their Horse. The Blackhand Cyder Society in the village of Denton, Norfolk has developed its own version with a local maiden performing the blessing. 


== Etymology ==

The word 'Wassail' comes from the Old English phrase 'was hál', meaning 'be well'.


== Customs ==
On either Twelfth Night (5 or 6 January) or Old Twelfth Night ("Old Twelvey", 17 January), men would go with their wassail bowl into the orchard and go about the trees. Slices of bread or toast were laid at the roots and sometimes tied to branches. Cider was also poured over the tree roots, and sometimes over the toast. Then they would make lots of noise, singing, banging pots and pans together, and firing off guns, to scare away any malignant spirits in the orchard. Many festivities also include morris dancing. The ceremony is said to "bless" the trees to produce a good crop in the forthcoming season. 
A folktale from Somerset reflecting this custom tells of the Apple Tree Man, the spirit of the oldest apple tree in an orchard, and in whom the fertility of the orchard is thought to reside. In the tale a man offers his last mug of mulled cider to the trees in his orchard and is rewarded by the Apple Tree Man who reveals to him the location of buried gold.


== Wassailing songs ==
There are many traditional songs associated with apple wassailing, but the “Apple Tree Wassail” (Roud 209) is probably the most famous. Prominent recordings include ones by The Watersons (1975), John Kirkpatrick (1995), Boiled in Lead (2008), Jon Boden (2016), The Dreadnoughts (2023), and Oli Steadman (2024).


== Traditional apple wassail rhymes ==

Henry David Thoreau also describes the tradition in "Wild Apples."


== See also ==
Apple Day
Wassail
Wassailing
Wish Tree


== References ==


== External links ==
Conrad Bladey Hutman Productions. "Traditions, songs and Rhymes of Apple Wasail". Archived from the original on 23 October 2009.
The Stations of the Sun by Ronald Hutton
Christmas Carols New and Old by Henry Ramsden Bramley and John Stainer (London: Novello, Ewer & Co., 1871)
Apple Wassail Songs