Basbousa (Arabic: بسبوسة, romanized: basbūsah) is a sweet, syrup-soaked semolina dessert popular throughout the Middle East and North Africa. The semolina batter is baked in a sheet pan, then sweetened with sugar syrup and typically cut into diamond (lozenge) shapes or squares.


== History ==
The Oxford Companion to Food (3rd edition) suggests that basbousa might have developed from a dish called ma'mounia, which was created around the 10th century. Ma'mounia was made by cooking rice in fat and syrup. This recipe was later adapted to use semolina, with the batter being cooked first and then soaked in syrup.
Another take on its origin suggests that basbousa was first made during the 16th century in the Ottoman Empire, likely in what is modern-day Turkey, to celebrate the conquest of Irevan (modern day Yerevan).


== Names ==

It is found in the cuisines of the Middle East, the Balkans and North Africa under a variety of names.

Albanian: revani, Albanian definite form: revanija
Arabic: بسبوسة basbūsah, هريسة harīsa, نمورة nammoura
Armenian: Շամալի, romanized: shamali
Bulgarian: реване, romanized: revane
Cypriot Greek: σάμαλι shamali
Greek: ρεβανί, romanized: revaní
Macedonian: раванија, romanized: ravanija
Somali: basbuusa
Persian: روغنی, romanized: rowġani, lit. 'oily'
Turkish: revani
Basbousa is the most common name for this dessert in the Middle East but it may be named differently depending on the region; it is often called "hareesa" in the Levant. Note that "harissa" in North Africa is a spicy red sauce. It is a popular dessert offered in many sweets bakeries in the Middle East and especially popular during Ramadan. 

Şambali is also referred to as "Damascus dessert" or "Damascus honey". Şam in Turkish means "Damascus".
Basbousa is believed by some derive its name from a colloquial Arabic expression meaning "just a kiss" (بس بوسة).


== Variations ==

Many variations of syrup-soaked semolina paste can be found in the Middle East; common ingredients include coconut, rose water, citrus, among many others.
Some denser versions also include eggs, modern versions include baking powder.
Some common versions are:

Pastūsha (sometimes stylized as pastūçha) is a variant of basbousa that originated in Kuwait in the 2010s. Like basbousa, it is made from semolina soaked in sweet syrup. It is characterized by the addition of finely ground pistachios and orange flower water.
Basbousa bil ashta: a Levantine and Egyptian variation of basbousa filled with qishta (milk clotted cream) in the middle.
Vegan basbousa: Basbusa is also available in vegan form using apple sauce to bind the base mix together instead of dairy and eggs.
Basbousa eem tapuzim: Israeli variation from the coastal region, it is flavored with orange juice.
Basbousa bil tamr: Libyan variant of basbousa where date spread is being added between two layers of the basbousa.
Tishpishti or tichpichtil is a Sephardic Jewish variant. The name derives from the Turkish phrase "Tez Pişti," meaning "cooked quickly."
Qizha pie: Palestinian variant of basbousa flavored with nigella seeds paste called Qizha.
Revani: Turkish variation, typically flavored with citrus juice.
Hilbeh: Palestinian variant of basbousa flavoured with fenugreek seeds.
Anise hareeseh (Arabic: هريسة يانسونية): Levantine anise flavored variation especially popular among Palestinians.
Shendetlie is an Albanian honey and walnut cake.
Kalb el louz is an Algerian semolina cake made with almond flour
Hareesa nabaqia (Levantine Arabic: الهريسة النبكية) originates from the city of Al-Nabek, Syria, and is coated in smen (clarified butter) and pistachios.
Şambali: Similar to revani, made with syrup, yogurt and semolina, it is popular in Greece and İzmir.


== See also ==
Arab cuisine
Kalburabastı
Melomakarono


== References ==

Works cited

Davidson, Alan (2014). Oxford companion to food. [S.l.]: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199677337.