Cormus domestica, commonly known as service tree or sorb tree, is a species of tree native to western, central and southern Europe, northwest Africa (Atlas Mountains), and southwest Asia (east to the Caucasus).  It may be called true service tree, to distinguish it from the wild service tree (Torminalis glaberrima). It is the only species in the monotypic genus Cormus.

It is a deciduous tree growing to 15–20 m (49–66 ft) (rarely to 30 m or 98 ft) tall with a trunk up to 1 m (3 ft 3 in) diameter, though it can also be a shrub 2–3 m (6.6–9.8 ft) tall on exposed sites. The bark is brown, smooth on young trees, becoming fissured and flaky on old trees. The winter buds are green, with a sticky, resinous coating. The leaves are 15–25 cm (5.9–9.8 in) long, pinnate with 13–21 leaflets 3–6 cm (1.2–2.4 in) long and 1 cm (0.39 in) broad, with a bluntly acute apex, and a serrated margin on the outer half or two thirds of the leaflet. The flowers are 13–18 mm (0.51–0.71 in) diameter, with five white petals and 20 creamy-white stamens; they are produced in corymbs 10–14 cm (3.9–5.5 in) diameter in late spring, and are hermaphrodite and insect pollinated. The fruit is a human-edible pome 2–3 cm (0.79–1.18 in)  called the "serviceberry" that is long, greenish-brown, and often tinged red on the side exposed to sunlight; it can be either apple-shaped (f. pomifera (Hayne) Rehder) or pear-shaped (f. pyrifera (Hayne) Rehder).


== Ecology ==
Cormus domestica is generally rare, listed as an endangered species in Switzerland and Austria, and uncommon in Spain. In the UK, one very old tree that existed in the Wyre Forest before being destroyed by fire in 1862 used to be considered native, but it is now generally considered to be more likely of cultivated origin, probably from a mediaeval monastery orchard planting. More recently, a small population of genuinely wild specimens was found growing as stunted shrubs on cliffs in south Wales (Glamorgan) and nearby southwest England (Gloucestershire). It is a very rare species in Britain, occurring at only a handful of sites. Its largest English population is within the Horseshoe Bend Site of Special Scientific Interest at Shirehampton, near Bristol.
A further population has been discovered growing wild in Cornwall on a cliff in the upper Camel Estuary.
It is a long-lived tree, with ages of 300–400 years estimated for some in Britain.
One of the largest and probably oldest known specimens in Europe is on an educational trail near the town of Strážnice in the province of Moravia, Czech Republic. Its trunk measures 462 cm (15.16 ft) in circumference, with a crown 11 m (36 ft) high and 18 m (59 ft) across. It is estimated to be around 450 years old.


== Cultivation and uses ==
 
The fruit is a component of a cider-like drink which is still made in parts of Europe. Picked straight off the tree, it is highly astringent and gritty; however, when left to blet (overripen) it sweetens and becomes pleasant to eat. In the Moravian Slovakia region of the Czech Republic, there is a community-run museum with an educational trail and a festival for this tree, with products like jam, juice and brandy made from its fruit.
The sorb tree is cited in the Babylonian Talmud in Ketubot 79a. The example refers in Jewish Babylonian Aramaic to a "thicket of zardəṯā" (אִבָּא, זַרְדְּתָא). 
In ancient Greece, the fruit was cut in half and pickled, which in Plato's Symposium (190d7-8) has Aristophanes use as a metaphor for the cutting in half of the original spherical humans by Zeus.
Service tree wood was often used for manufacturing wooden planes of all types used for working wood, because servicetree wood is fairly dense and holds a profile well.


== Etymology and other names ==
The English name comes from Middle English serves, plural of serve, from Old English syrfe, borrowed from the Latin name sorbus; it is unrelated to the verb serve. Other English names include sorb, sorb tree, and whitty pear—"whitty" because the leaves are similar to rowan (i.e. pinnate), and "pear" due to the shape of the fruit. The name sorb, likewise, is from the Latin sorbus; because of its fruit and has nothing to do with the Slavic ethnic groups known as the Sorbs and Serbs.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Wedig Kausch-Blecken von Schmeling: Der Speierling. Verlag Kausch, Bovenden 2000, 184 S.
Hrdousek V. et al.: The Service Tree. The Tree for a New Europe. Brazda, Hodonin, 2014, 240 pages; 550 pictures
Sorbus domestica - distribution map, genetic conservation units and related resources. European Forest Genetic Resources Programme (EUFORGEN)