Transnistria, a breakaway state internationally recognised as part of Moldova, has a state emblem, adopted officially on 18 July 2000 alongside the state flag. It constitutes a remodeled version of the former Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic's emblem, which was replaced by the internationally recognized Moldovan government after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. The only major pictorial change made in the Transnistrian version involves the addition of waves, representing the River Dniester. However, the inscriptions on the banner were changed: unlike the Moldavian SSR emblem, which bore the acronym РССМ (for "Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic") and the USSR state slogan "Workers of the world, unite!" in the "Moldavian" (Romanian in Moldovan Cyrillic) and Russian languages, the Transnistrian emblem bears the name PRIDNESTROVIAN MOLDAVIAN REPUBLIC in the Russian, Romanian and Ukrainian languages. 

In Russian, it reads "ПРИДНЕСТРОВСКАЯ МОЛДАВСКАЯ РЕСПУБЛИКА" (transliterated as Pridnestrovskaya Moldavskaya Respublika) to the left;
In Romanian (Moldovan Cyrillic), it reads "РЕПУБЛИКА МОЛДОВЕНЯСКЭ НИСТРЯНЭ" (transliterated as Republica Moldovenească Nistreană) in the middle;
In Ukrainian, it reads "ПРИДНІСТРОВСЬКА МОЛДАВСЬКА РЕСПУБЛІКА" (transliterated as Prydnistrovs'ka Moldavs'ka Respublika) to the right.
Despite the emblem's depiction of the hammer and sickle, Transnistria is not a socialist state. The current president of Transnistria, Vadim Krasnoselsky, who identifies himself as a monarchist, has stated that he considers the Soviet symbolism in the emblems of his country to be "irrelevant".


== Other emblems ==
The law which formally established the Administrative-Territorial Units of the Left Bank of the Dniester contains provisions for the region to adopt its own symbols. The region has not currently adopted a distinctive emblem therefore the coat of arms of Moldova are used for official purposes.


== See also ==
Coat of arms of Tiraspol
Coat of arms of Gagauzia


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Coats of arms of Transnistria at Wikimedia Commons
Emblem of Transnistria