Fragaria virginiana, known as Virginia strawberry, wild strawberry, common strawberry, or mountain strawberry, is a perennial North American strawberry that grows across much of the United States and southern Canada. It is one of the two species of wild strawberry that were hybridized to create the modern domesticated garden strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa).


== Description ==

Fragaria virginiana can grow up to 10 centimetres (4 inches) tall. The plant typically bears numerous trifoliate leaves that are green on top, pale green on the lower surface. Each leaflet is about 10 cm (4 in)  long and 4 cm (1.6 in) wide. The leaflet is oval shaped and has coarse teeth along the edge except near the bottom. This plant has a five-petaled white flower with numerous pistils, surrounded by yellow-anthered stamens. There are ten small green sepals under the petals.
The seeds of this plant are developed from the pistils in the centre of the flower which will become dark-coloured fruit (achenes) on the strawberry. The fruit of the wild strawberry is smaller than that of the garden strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa). Botanically, the fruit is classified as an aggregate accessory fruit, but it is commonly called a berry. Strawberries reproduce both sexually by seed, and asexually by runners (stolons). 


=== Cytology ===

All strawberries have a base haploid count of 7 chromosomes. Fragaria virginiana is octoploid, having eight sets of these chromosomes for a total of 56. These eight genomes pair as four distinct sets, of two different types, with little or no pairing between sets. The genome composition of the octoploid strawberry species has generally been indicated as AAA'A'BBB'B'. The A-type genomes were likely contributed by diploid ancestors related to Fragaria vesca or similar species, while the B-type genomes seem to descend from a close relative of Fragaria iinumae. The exact process of hybridization and speciation which resulted in the octoploid species is still unknown, but it appears that the genome compositions of both Fragaria chiloensis and Fragaria virginiana (and by extension their hybrid, the cultivated octoploid garden strawberry as well) are identical.


=== Similar species ===
The plants resemble Hesperochiron pumilus, but have distinct leaves and more than five stamens.


== Reproduction ==
As stated prior, Strawberries reproduce both sexually by seed, and asexually by runners (stolons). This is reflected in the composition of gynodioecious Fragaria virginiana populations. Having both bisexual and female plants within a population creates room to have a variety of reproductive strategies. 
When reproducing sexually, the strawberries require pollinators to take the pollen from one plants anthers to another plants stigma. These pollinators, often bees, flies and ants, have been found to have a preference for visiting the hermaphrodite plants over the female plants. 
Once the plants have been fertilized and fruits have developed, Fragaria virginiana relies on large herbivores for seed dispersal. Ideally, these herbivores will eat the fruit, travel to a different location, and defecate out the remaining seed. This puts the seed in a new location, which is a longterm strategy aiming towards genetic diversity within the population, and surrounds it in feces fertilizer. 


== Taxonomy ==
Fragaria virginiana Mill. is considered to be the valid name for this plant by a number of authorities (and was described by Philip Miller in 1768 in the eighth edition of The Gardeners Dictionary). According to the International Plant Names Index the name, Fragaria virginiana Duchesne, published by Antoine Nicolas Duchesne in 1766, is an invalid name. However, other authorities consider the valid name to be Fragaria virginiana Duchesne.


=== Subspecies ===
There are four recognized subspecies:

Fragaria virginiana subsp. glauca (formerly known as F. ovalis)
Fragaria virginiana subsp. grayana
Fragaria virginiana subsp. platypetala
Fragaria virginiana subsp. virginiana


== Disease and plant defense ==
Fragaria virginiana faces threats from multiple fungi and bacteria including gray mold, anthracnose, powdery mildew, leaf spot, rhizopus, and angular leaf spot. 
In agricultural settings, these diseases are managed through a variety of methods such as genetic breeding to create resistant plant strains, chemical deterrence against the fungi/bacteria, and plant rotation to help keep plant populations and soil fresh and free of pathogen. 
Disease, however, is not the only threat facing Fragaria virginiana. Herbivory is equally, if not more significant, impactful to the survival and reproduction of these plants. Unlike their industrial counterpart, Fragaria × ananassa, Fragaria virginiana is more commonly found in the wild, resulting in the uncontrolled consumption of the plant and its reproductive fruits by herbivores. The pests that feed on this plant include but are not limited to aphids, thrips, froghoppers and leafhoppers. Fascinatingly, Fragaria virginiana attracts its pests natural predator: parasitoid wasps. This, without the employment of any physical mechanisms, indirectly but effectively protects the plant from its consumers. 


== Uses ==
The berries are edible. A popular type called "Little Scarlet" is grown in Great Britain, having been imported from the United States in the early 1900s.


== In culture ==
According to Iroquois mythology, the first strawberries grew out of Earth Woman's heart after she died giving birth to her twin sons, Sapling and Flint.
According to Cherokee mythology, the first strawberries were created by The Sun to reunite the quarreling First Man and First Woman.  The myth attempts to explain why the Eastern edge of old Cherokee territory in the Appalachian region was known for its rich abundance of strawberries and other fruits.  Because of the myth, strawberries are often kept in Cherokee households as a reminder to not argue and as a symbol of good luck.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Fragaria virginiana". Plants for a Future.
"Fragaria ovalis". Plants for a Future.