Fruit curd is a dessert spread and topping. It is usually made with citrus fruit, though may be made with other fruits. Curds are often used as spreads and as flavourings.


== Description ==
Fruit curd is a dessert spread and topping usually made with citrus fruit, such as lemon, lime, orange, grapefruit or tangerine. Other flavor variations include passion fruit (or lilikoi), mango, and berries such as raspberries, cranberries or blackberries. The basic ingredients of fruit curd are beaten egg yolks, sugar, fruit juice, and zest, which are gently cooked together until thick and then allowed to cool, forming a soft, smooth, flavorful spread. The egg yolks are usually tempered in the cooking process to prevent their coagulation. Some recipes also include egg whites or butter.
Curds differ from pie fillings or custards in that they contain a higher proportion of juice and zest, which gives them a bolder, fruitier taste. Curds containing butter have a smoother and creamier texture than both pie fillings and custards, which contain little or no butter and use cornstarch or flour for thickening. Additionally, unlike custards, curds are not usually eaten on their own.
Homemade lemon curd was usually made in relatively small amounts as it did not keep as well as jam. In more modern times, larger quantities became possible because of the use of refrigeration. Commercially manufactured curds often contain additional preservatives and thickening agents.


== Use ==
In late 19th- and early 20th-century England, homemade lemon curd was traditionally served with bread or scones at afternoon tea as an alternative to jam, and as a filling for cakes, small pastries and tarts. Contemporary commercially made curds remain a popular spread for bread, scones, toast, waffles, crumpets, pancakes, cheesecake or muffins.
Fruit curds can also be used as a flavoring for desserts or yoghurt. Lemon-meringue pie—made with lemon curd and topped with meringue—has been a popular dessert in Britain, Canada, Australia and the US since the 19th century.  Lemon curd can also have whipped cream folded into it for such uses as filling cream puffs.


== Gallery ==


== See also ==

List of dessert sauces
List of lemon dishes and drinks
List of spreads


== References ==