Green Bay Botanical Garden (47 acres) is a nonprofit botanical garden located at 2600 Larsen Road, Green Bay, Wisconsin. It is open daily in the warmer months, or weekdays in the colder months; an admission fee is charged. The gardens opened in 1996 on a site that was previously Larsen Orchard.


== Gardens ==
As of 2017, the gardens include:

Donald J. Schneider Family Grand Garden - with an overlook arbor opening to the Billie Kress Amphitheater with a grand stage and grassy seating for over 1,500 people, a classroom with bathrooms, a catering kitchen to the west, and the Matthew Schmidt Garden featuring the Wangerin Pavilion to the east
Agnes Schneider Terrace -  perennial flowers and ornamental grasses.
Four Seasons Garden - a garden with winter interest, featuring magnolias, crabapples, lilacs, and perennials.
Gertrude B. Nielsen Children’s Garden - children's garden, with a tree house, slide, maze, and sundial.
Kaftan Lusthaus - a summerhouse of Scandinavian design.
Mabel Thome Fountain & Garden - a fountain ringed with crabapples and annuals.
Marguerite Kress Oval - a rose garden of contemporary design.
John and Janet Van Den Wymelenberg Color and Foliage Garden - trees, shrubs, grasses, perennials, and vines with varied foliage (yellow, maroon, chartreuse, gray, and green).
Larsen Orchard Remnant - apple trees, with an underplanting of spring-flowering bulbs.
Mary Hendrickson Johnson Wisconsin Woodland Garden - an informal garden of native trees, shrubs and wild flowers surrounding a lawn for social gatherings.
Schierl Wellhouse and Garden - The garden's well, and a garden of annuals and herbs.
Stumpf Belvedere - a gazebo in early Greek style.
Upper Rose Garden - a rose garden of hardy shrubs and hybrid tea roses.
Vanderperren English Cottage Garden - a Wisconsin interpretation of an English cottage garden.
During the winter months, the garden hosts the WPS Garden of Lights, a display of over 200,000 holiday lights.


== Gallery ==


== See also ==
List of botanical gardens and arboretums in Wisconsin


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website