KAPP (channel 35) in Yakima, Washington, and KVEW (channel 42) in Kennewick, Washington, are television stations affiliated with ABC and owned by Morgan Murphy Media. KAPP's studios are located in the Liberty Building on North 3rd Street in downtown Yakima, and its transmitter is atop Ahtanum Ridge; KVEW maintains its own studios on North Edison Street in Kennewick, with transmitter on Jump Off Joe Butte.
KVEW operates as a semi-satellite of KAPP, serving the Tri-Cities area. It simulcasts all network and syndicated programming as provided through its parent, and the two stations share a website. However, KVEW airs separate commercial inserts and legal identifications. Local newscasts are simulcast on both stations. KAPP serves the western half of the Yakima–Tri-Cities market while KVEW serves the eastern portion. The two stations are counted as a single unit for ratings purposes. Master control and some internal operations are based at the studios of sister station and fellow ABC affiliate KXLY-TV on West Boone Avenue in Spokane.
On satellite, KAPP is only available on DirecTV, while Dish Network carries KVEW instead.


== History ==
Before KAPP signed on, CBS affiliate KIMA-TV (channel 29) had carried ABC as a secondary affiliation until KNDO (channel 23) signed on in 1959. KNDO became the area's primary ABC affiliate until 1965, when it switched its primary affiliation to NBC. Both KNDO and KIMA-TV shared ABC's programming from that point until KAPP signed on the air on September 21, 1970, and all ABC programming moved to KAPP. The most notable ABC program shown on the station's first day was the first-ever Monday Night Football game between the Cleveland Browns and New York Jets.
KVEW began serving the Tri-Cities region in October 29, 1970, a month after KAPP signed on. Before KVEW's existence, KEPR-TV (channel 19) had carried ABC as a secondary affiliation until 1959; KNBS-TV (channel 22) operated briefly in nearby Walla Walla, Washington, as an ABC affiliate in 1960; KNDU (channel 25) signed on in 1961 and became the area's primary ABC affiliate until 1965. Both KEPR-TV and KNDU shared ABC programming from that point until KVEW signed on.
KAPP and KVEW began airing Spokane's MeTV affiliate KXMN-LD on a digital subchannel in September 2006. They were two of the remaining stations to sign-off every night, but that practice ended in 2012 when World News Now was added to the programming lineup.
On December 22, 2008, KAPP and KVEW discontinued their 6 p.m. and weekend newscasts. The 11 p.m. newscast was reduced to a five-minute broadcast before Nightline, and post-January 2013, Jimmy Kimmel Live! In addition to this move, 17 employees from KAPP and KVEW were laid off and KAPP's studio, formerly located on South 24th Avenue, was sold off and its operations were relocated downtown.
While weather came from KXLY for several years, local weather reports have returned as of 2016, with meteorologist Jason Valentine at 5 and 6:30 p.m., and Kristen Walls during their Good Morning Northwest newscast. With the cancellation of The Insider and Extra moving from 6 to 7:30 p.m. on September 11, 2017, KAPP/KVEW began airing local news at 6 p.m., for the first time in almost a decade.


== Technical information ==


=== Subchannels ===
The stations' signals are multiplexed:

KAPP and KVEW have been digital-only since February 17, 2009.


=== Translators ===
K20JL-D  Ellensburg (translates KAPP)
K14HT-D  Walla Walla (translates KVEW)


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website