This is a list of Christmas dishes by country.


== Albania and Kosovo ==
Baklava
Gjel deti me përshesh


== Andorra ==
Sopa de Galets
Trinxat


== American Samoa (U.S.), Samoa, Tonga and Tuvalu ==
Puaa umu


== Argentina and Uruguay ==

Panettone (known locally as pan dulce) and turrón are the most popular Christmas sweets in Argentina regardless of socioeconomic status, with 76% of Argentines choosing the former and 59% the latter in 2015. Mantecol, a typical peanut dessert, is also popular, being favored by 49% of Argentines in the same survey. Sparkling wines, ciders and frizzantes concentrate most of their sales during Christmas season; sparkling wine is mostly consumed by small families with high and medium socioeconomic status living in Greater Buenos Aires and the country's largest cities, while cider and frizzantes are popular among lower classes and large families.

Vitel toné
Turrón
Pan dulce
Asado (beef, chicken, calf, lamb, suckling pig)
Clericó (or clericot), a sangria-like beverage that combines wine with chopped fruit.
Cider (apple, pineapple) and sparkling wine
Budín
Salads
Russian salad
Waldorf salad
Fruit salad
Pionono
Matambre
Lengua a la vinagreta
Garrapiñadas, dried fruits and comfits
Mantecol
Sandwiches de miga
Pavita


== Australia ==

White Christmas, a sweet slice made of copha and mixed fruit
Cold ham and cold turkey
Seafood and salads
Roast chicken, ham and turkey
Stuffing
Christmas cake or Christmas pudding
Custard
Gingerbread in Christmas shapes
Christmas damper – in wreath or star shape, served with butter, jam, honey or golden syrup. Made in the Australian bush in the 19th century.
Lollies, such as rocky road; rum balls; candy canes
Champagne
Eggnog
Trifle
Pavlova
Prawns
Mince pie
Christmas cookies


== Austria and Liechtenstein ==
Bock
Bratwurst
Christmas carp
Christmas goose
Glühwein
Kaiserschmarrn
Knödel
Linzer torte
Red cabbage
Vanillekipferl


== Bangladesh ==

Pitha
Nankhatai
Pulao
Rôst
Musallam
Cha
Homemade Christmas cake
Shobji
Mishti (Bengali sweets)
Nakshi Pitha
Chunga pitha
Patishapta Pith
Bhapa pitha
Tel pitha


== Belarus ==
Borscht
Kutya


== Belgium ==
Cougnou (with various like cougnolle), sweet bread in the form of the infant Jesus


== Belize, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua ==
Tamales
Ponche (Christmas fruit punch served hot with much fruit)
pavo (turkey)
Buñuelos (fluffy sweet dessert made with corn with maple syrup)
chicken (prepared with different stuffings and accompanied with various side dishes such as salads or rice)


== Bolivia and Peru ==
Apple cider
Buñuelo
Roasted chicken
Cuy Chactado
Potato salad
Roast pork
Roast turkey


== Brazil ==
Lombo à Califórnia – pork loins
Rabanada – French toast
Leitão assado – roasted piglet
Peru – roast turkey
Farofa
Pavê – trifle
Ham
Bacalhau – codfish
Brazil nut
Arroz à grega
Potato salad
Salpicão – chicken salad with raisins
Panettone
Crème caramel
Mousse
Cider
Grape juice
Wine


== Canada ==

Bûche de Noël
Butter tarts
Candy canes
Christmas pudding
Eggnog
Fruitcake
Mince pie
Cranberry sauce
Roasted turkey
Brussels Sprouts
Mashed Potatoes and Gravy
Shortbread
Stuffing (also known as Trimming or Dressing)
Trifle
Tourtière
Ragoût de Boulettes (Meatball Stew)
Ragoût de Pattes de Cochon (Stewed Pig's Feet)
Salted Beef (commonly known as Corned Beef)
Fish and Brewis
Gingerbread cookies (or Ginger and Molasses cookies)
Figgy duff (pudding)
Christmas slush  (made from a mixture of fruit juices, vodka, ginger ale, or lemon-lime soda)
Roasted chestnuts
Christmas cookies
Snowball dessert (made with cocoa, rolled oats and coconut)
Nanaimo Bar
Mulled Wine
Christmas Ham
Tarte au sucre
Hot chocolate (also known as "hot cocoa", in various flavours like peppermint, white chocolate, etc.)
Gingerbread house
Sweet potatoes or Yam
Hot Apple cider
Raw Caribou, Seal meat, and Muktuk (eaten in Nunuvut by the local Indigenous communities)
Arctic char (raw or cooked)


== Chile ==

Cola de mono – (literally, "monkey's tail") a Chilean Christmas beverage, with aguardiente, milk, coffee, and flavoured with vanilla and cloves
Pan de Pascua – Chilean Christmas sponge cake flavoured with cloves and with bits of candied fruits, raisins, walnuts and almonds.
Roasted turkey
Ponche a la romana – eggnog-style beverage made of champagne and pineapple-flavoured icecream.


== China and Taiwan ==
Char siu
Crispy fried chicken
Crossing-the-bridge noodles
Hotpot
Jiaozi
Lamian
Peking duck


== Colombia ==
Colombian Christmas dishes are mostly sweets and desserts. Some of the most popular dishes include:
Buñuelos
Natilla
Manjar blanco
Hojaldres
Brevas (Candied figs with cheese)
Christmas cookies
Sweet bread filled with fruits like raisins and raspberries.
Lechona (rice baked inside a pig, with peas, the meat of the pig and other delicacies)
Tamales
Ponqué envinado (red wine cake)
Turkey
Pernil de Cerdo (pork leg, usually roasted)
Potato salad
Panettone


== Cuba ==
Crema De Vie – Eggnog made with rum, lemon rind, and spices.
Majarete – A pudding made with corn, cornstarch, milk, lemon rind, spices, and sugar
Platillo Moros y Cristianos
Lechon asado
Turrón


== Czech Republic and Slovakia ==

Kapustnica – Christmas cabbage soup
Fish soup
Christmas carp
Potato salad with mayonnaise, hard-boiled eggs and boiled vegetables
Kuba – groats and mushrooms
Grilled white sausage
Vánoční cukroví – Christmas cookies
Christmas bread (vánočka)
Fruitcake
Gingerbread
Before the Christmas holidays, many kinds of sweet biscuits are prepared. These sweet biscuits are then served during the whole Christmas period and exchanged among friends and neighbours. Also very popular are a preparation of small gingerbreads garnished by sugar icing.


== Denmark ==

Æbleskiver – traditional Danish dough ball made in a special pan (a type of doughnut with no hole), sprinkled with powdered sugar and served with raspberry or strawberry jam
Sylte – a form of head cheese, a terrine or meat jelly made from pork, traditionally pig's head was used
Julesild – spiced pickled herring often flavoured with Christmas spices such as cloves and allspice
Boiled whole potatoes
Brun sovs (brown sauce) – a traditional dark gravy, used to cover meat dishes like roasted pork and duck (flæskesteg, andesteg) and the boiled potato
Brunede kartofler – caramelised potatoes
Julebryg – Christmas beer
Gløgg – mulled red wine combined with spices, sugar, raisins and chopped almonds typically served warm
Risalamande – rice pudding. A dish made from rice, whipped cream and almonds, served cold with cherry sauce (kirsebærsauce)
Flæskesteg – roast pork with cracklings
Andesteg – roast duck with apple and prune stuffing
Rødkål – red cabbage pickled, sweet-sour red cabbage served hot as a side dish
Christmas cookies – Vaniljekranse, klejner, jødekager, pebernødder, honningkager, brunkager and finskbrød
Konfekt, marzipan, caramelised fruits, nougat and chocolate-covered nuts
Ground nuts


== Dominican Republic ==
Croquette
Empanada
Ensalada Rusa – Olivier salad (Russian potato salad)
Ensalada verde – iceberg lettuce, onions, cucumber, and tomatoes salad
Moro de guandules con coco – rice with pigeon peas and coconut milk
Pasteles de hojas – Puerto Rican tamales
Pastelon – casserole
Pig roast
Pollo al horno – roasted chicken
Telera – Dominican bread similar to Mexican sandwich rolls
Drinks:

Anisette – anise-flavored liquor
Guavaberry – a drink from the Lesser Antilles historic Saint Martin natives now a part of the Dominican Republics Christmas tradition
Ponche crema – eggnog
Jengibre – ginger tea with spices and lemon
Mandarin Liqueur –  Mandarin peels fermented with rum and sugar
Desserts:

Buñuelos – fried cassava dough balls covered in spiced flavored syrup
Turrón – honey and almond nougat. Tradition from Spain
Vaniljekranse – Danish butter cookies
Fruits and nuts – a variety of nuts, fresh, and dried fruit


== Estonia ==
Hapukapsas
Mulgi kapsad
Piparkook
Sült
Verivorst


== Finland ==

Christmas smorgasbord from Finland, "joulupöytä", (translated "Yule table"), a traditional display of Christmas food served at Christmas in Finland, similar to the Swedish smörgåsbord, including:

Christmas ham with mustard (almost every family has one for Christmas)
Freshly salted salmon (gravlax graavilohi) and whitefish graavisiika
Pickled herring in various forms (tomato, mustard, matjes or onion sauces)
Rosolli (cold salad dish with diced beetroot, potato and carrot – some varieties also incorporate apple)
Lutefisk and Béchamel sauce
Whitefish and pikeperch
Potato casserole (sweetened or not, depending on preference)
Boiled potatoes
Carrot casserole
Rutabaga casserole (lanttulaatikko)
Various sauces
Assortment of cheese, most commonly (leipäjuusto) and Aura (aura-juusto)
Christmas bread, usually sweet bread (joululimppu)
Karelian pasties, rice pasties, served with egg-butter (karjalanpiirakka)
Other meat dishes could be:

Karelian hot pot, traditional meat stew originating from the region of Karelia (karjalanpaisti)
Desserts:

Rice pudding or rice porridge topped with cinnamon, sugar and cold milk or with mixed fruit soup (riisipuuro)
Joulutorttu, traditionally a star-shaped piece of puff-pastry with prune marmalade in the middle
Gingerbread, sometimes in the form of a gingerbread house or gingerbread man (piparkakut)
Mixed fruit soup or prune soup, kissel (sekahedelmäkiisseli, luumukiisseli)
Drinks:

Glögg or mulled wine (glögi)
Christmas beer (jouluolut); local manufacturers produce Christmas varieties
"Home beer" (non-alcoholic beer-like drink, similar to the Russian beverage kvass) (kotikalja)


== France and Monaco ==

Oysters
Foie gras
Smoked salmon
Scallops
Champagne
Crêpes (Brittany)
Chapon (roasted chicken)
Dinde aux Marrons (chestnut-stuffed turkey)
Ganzeltopf (goose) (Alsace)
Goose (Normandy)
Bûche de Noël
Kouglof (Alsace)
Thirteen desserts (Provence): The thirteen desserts are the traditional Christmas dessert in the French region of Provence. The Christmas supper ends with 13 dessert items, representing Jesus Christ and the 12 apostles. The desserts are traditionally set out Christmas Eve and remain on the table three days until December 27.
Walnut
Quince cheese
Almond
Raisin
Calisson of Aix-en-Provence
Nougat blanc
Nougat noir au miel
Apple
Pear
Orange
Winter melon
Fougasse (Provençal bread)


== Germany ==

Christstollen – Stollen is a fruitcake with bits of candied fruits, raisins, walnuts and almonds and spices such as cardamom and cinnamon; sprinkled with confectioners sugar. Often there's also a core of marzipan.
Pflaumentoffel
Christmas carp
Pfefferkuchenhaus – a gingerbread house decorated with candies, sweets and sugar icing (in reference to the gingerbread house of the fairy tale Hänsel and Gretel)
Printen
Oblaten Lebkuchen
Springerle
Weihnachtsplätzchen (Christmas cookies)
Roast goose, often paired with kartoffelklosse
Venison – e.g. meat of roe deer usually served with red cabbage, brussels sprout and lingonberry sauce
Herring salad – salad of pickled or soused herring, beetroot, potatoes, apple
Kartoffelsalat (potato salad) with Wurst (sausages) is traditionally eaten in northern Germany for supper on Christmas Eve
Schäufele (a corned, smoked ham) usually served with potato salad in southern Germany for dinner on Christmas Eve
Weisswurst – sausages with veal and bacon, usually flavored with parsley, lemon, mace, onions, ginger and cardamom
Feuerzangenbowle
Glühwein (hot spiced wine)


== Greece and Cyprus ==
Kourabiedes
Melomakarono
Diples
Christopsomo (Christmas bread)
Pork or turkey


== Greenland ==
Kiviak


== Haiti ==
Chicken Creole (Haitian stewed chicken)
Djon Djon
Pikliz


== Hong Kong and Macau ==
Dim sum


== Hungary ==

Christmas carp
Fish soup (halászlé) various recipes
Stuffed cabbage (töltött káposzta)
Roast goose
Roast duck
Pastry roll filled with walnut or poppy seed (bejgli)
Bread pudding with poppy seed (mákos guba or bobájka)
Szaloncukor
Cheesy Garlic Bread Sticks


== Iceland ==

Hamborgarhryggur – a smoked, cured pork roast.
Lambalæri - heated or smoked sheep meat from a sheep's foot.
Ptarmigan – gamebird in the grouse family
Hangikjöt
Oven-roasted turkey
Beverage combination of Malt and Appelsín.
Jarðarberjagrautur
Möndlugrautur – a Christmas rice pudding with an almond hidden inside (the same as the Swedish Julgröt)
Caramelised potatoes
Pickled red cabbage
Smákökur – small cookies of various sorts
Jólasúkkulaðibitakökur
Loftkökur
Mömmukökur
Sörur
Spesiur
Gyðingakökur
Piparkökur
Marens Kornflexkökur
Laufabrauð – round, very thin flat cakes with a diameter of about 15 to 20 cm (6 to 8 inches), decorated with leaf-like, geometric patterns and fried briefly in hot fat or oil


== India and Pakistan ==
Indian Christians and Pakistani Christians in Indian subcontinent celebrate Christmas by enjoying several dishes, such as Allahabadi cake, Candy canes, Plum cakes etc. Some of the popular dishes eaten during Christmas in India and Pakistan are:

Allahabadi cake.
Christmas cake – a type of fruit cake.
Mathri – a traditional flaky biscuit.
Gulab Jamun – a traditional sweet prepared with khoa.
Walnut fudge
Jalebi
Mincemeatpie
Kheer – boiled rice cooked with milk, sugar, saffron and is garnished with nuts such as almonds and pistachios. It can also be made with barley.
Chhena Poda – a dessert made with Chhena (cottage cheese) which is slightly roasted and soaked in sugar syrup. It is garnished with cashew nuts and served. Chhena Poda is popular in the Odisha state of India. It is eaten during the Christmas season but is available throughout the year.
Ghee cookies
Rose cookies
Bolinhas de coco – a type of coconut cookies
Chocolate covered fruit
Marzipan
Dumplings – dumplings filled with Indian spices with a sweet or savoury filling.
Tarts
Nankhatai
Neureos – a kind of dumpling made of semolina, khoa and nutlet.
Roast chicken
Dates roll- a type of Christmas cookies with dates
Bebinca – a dessert popular in Goa which is eaten during Christmas season.
Biryani
Stew – stews prepared with chicken, mutton, fish.
Candy canes
Cormolas
Milk cream – milk fudge
Chocolate candies
Vindaloo – a spicy Goan curry with pork made during Christmas.
Fruits, such as apple, orange, guava.
Mixed nuts
Kulkuls
Pilaf
Duck curry
Jujubee
Cupcakes
Drinks, such as cider, ginger ale, etc.
Church services are also held in churches throughout India and Pakistan, in which Christmas dinners are held which include dishes such as Allahabadi cake, candy canes, Christmas cookies.
The Koswad is a set of sweets and snacks prepared in the Christmastide by people of the Konkan region. South Indian states such as Kerala have traditions observed of home-brewed wine, mostly grapes but sometimes other fruits as well like apple and rose apple; ethnic recipes of slow-cooked beef fry, rice and coconut Hoppers, lamb stew, fried rice Indian and fusion style; desserts such as Falooda, pastry, and a whole array of steamed, boiled or baked sweets, often with coconut, jaggery, sugar and spices such as cardamom and cloves (Achappam, Murukku, Tapioca chip, Sukiyan, Neyyappam).


== Indonesia ==
Klappertaart
Poffertjes
Ayam rica-rica
Lampet
Rendang
Kohu-kohu
Kidney bean soup


== Iran ==
Ash-e doogh
Aush reshteh
Baghali polo
Chelow kebab
Kafbikh
Nan-o-kabab
Tahchin


== Iraq ==
Kleicha
Masgouf
Qeema


== Ireland ==
Christmas cake
Christmas pudding
Irish coffee
Minced pie
Sherry Trifle
Spiced beef (traditionally served in Ireland and Northern Ireland)
Roast turkey


== Israel ==
Challah
Latke
Sufganiyah


== Italy ==

Christmas in Italy (Italian: Natale, pronounced [naˈtaːle]) is one of the country's major holidays and begins on 8 December, with the Feast of the Immaculate Conception, the day on which traditionally the Christmas tree is mounted and ends on 6 January, of the following year with the Epiphany (Italian: Epifania [epifaˈniːa]). According to tradition, the Christmas Eve dinner must not contain meat. A popular Christmas Day dish in Naples and in Southern Italy is capitone, which is a female eel. A traditional Christmas Day dish from Northern Italy is capon (gelded chicken). Abbacchio is more common in Central Italy. The Christmas Day dinner traditionally consists by typical Italian Christmas dishes, such as abbacchio, agnolini, cappelletti, Pavese agnolotti, panettone, pandoro, torrone, panforte, struffoli, mustacciuoli, bisciola, cavallucci, veneziana, pizzelle, zelten, or others, depending on the regional cuisine. Christmas on 25 December is celebrated with a family lunch, also consisting of different types of pasta and meat dishes, cheese and local sweets.

Abbacchio (Central Italy).
Agnolini (Mantua) – a type of egg-based stuffed pasta.
Bisciola (Valtellina) – an artisanal Italian sweet leavened bread.
Cappelletti (Emilia-Romagna and Marche) – a ring-shaped Italian stuffed pasta so called for the characteristic shape that resembles a hat (cappello in Italian).
Capon (Northern Italy).
Cavallucci (Siena) – a rich Italian Christmas pastry prepared with anise, walnuts, candied fruits, coriander, and flour.
Eel (Southern Italy).
Pandoro (Verona) – a sweet originally from Verona. Pandoro is today the most consumed Italian Christmas dessert together with panettone.
Panforte (Tuscany) – a traditional chewy Italian dessert containing fruits and nuts.
Panettone (Milan) – a type of sweet bread and fruitcake, originally from Milan, usually prepared and enjoyed for Christmas and New Year in Western, Southern, and Southeastern Europe, as well as in South America, Eritrea, Australia, the United States and Canada.
Pavese agnolotti (Oltrepò pavese) – a type of egg-based stuffed pasta of the Lombard cuisine served hot or warm.
Pizzelle (Ortona) –  an Italian waffle cookies made from flour, eggs, sugar, butter or vegetable oil, and flavoring (usually anise or anisette, less commonly vanilla or lemon zest).
Prosecco (Veneto)
Mustacciuoli (Naples) – a dessert having a soft, spicy, cake-like interior covered in chocolate.
Spumante (Piedmont)
Struffoli (Naples) – a type of deep-fried dough.
Torrone (Northern Italy) – a sweet containing whole hazelnuts, almonds and pistachios or only have nut meal added to the nougat.
Veneziana (Milan) – a sweet covered with sugar grains or almond icing.
Zelten (Trentino) – a sweet prepared using rye flour, wheat flour, dried and candied fruits, orange zest, and various spices.


== Jamaica ==
Christmas (fruit) cake or black cake – a heavy fruit cake made with dried fruit, wine and rum.
Sorrel – often served to guests with Christmas cake; Sorrel is made from the same sepals as Latin American drink "Jamaica," but is more concentrated and usually flavored with ginger. Adding rum is traditional at Christmas time.
Curry goat
Rice and peas – a Sunday staple, at Christmas dinner is usually made with green (fresh) gungo (pigeon) peas instead of dried kidney beans or other dried legumes.
Christmas ham
Chicken
Pine and ginger


== Japan ==
Christmas cake – the Japanese style Christmas cake is often a white cream cake, sponge cake frosted with whipped cream, topped with strawberries and with a chocolate plate that says Merry Christmas. Yule Logs are also available.
Christmas cookies - A Christmas sugar cookie's main ingredients are sugar, flour, butter, eggs, vanilla, and baking powder. Sugar cookies may be formed by hand, dropped, or rolled and cut into shapes. They are commonly decorated with additional sugar, icing, Christmas sprinkles. Decorative shapes and figures can be cut into the rolled-out dough using a cookie cutter.
Christmas cupcakes
Crème caramel pudding in Japan - a crème caramel ubiquitous in Japanese convenience stores under the name custard pudding. Made with eggs, sugar and milk, sometimes served with whipped cream and a cherry on top.
French fries
Fruit parfait - Made by boiling cream, egg, sugar and syrup to create layers differentiated by the inclusion of such ingredients as corn flakes and vanilla ice cream. Topped with melon, banana, peach, orange, apple, kiwi, cherries and strawberries and whipped cream.
Gingerbread house
Ice cream
KFC fried chicken – turkey as a dish is virtually unknown in Japan and the popularity of KFC's fried chicken at Christmas is such that orders are placed as much as two months in advance.
Nabemono
Poached egg salad
Shōyu ramen
Tamagoyaki - Japanese Omelette
Yakiniku


== Korea ==
Budae-jjigae
Gogigui
Korean royal cuisine
Makgeolli


== Latvia ==
Jāņu skābs
Piparkūkas


== Lithuania ==
Twelve-dish Christmas Eve supper – twelve dishes representing the twelve Apostles or twelve months of the year – plays the main role in Lithuanian Christmas tradition. The traditional dishes are served on December 24.
Poppy milk (aguonų pienas)
Slizikai ( or kūčiukai) – slightly sweet small pastries made from leavened dough and poppy seed
Auselės (Deep fried dumplings)
Herring with carrots (silkė su morkomis)
Herring with mushrooms (silkė su grybais)
Cranberry Kissel -  thickened and sweetened juice normally served warm


== Malaysia and Singapore ==
Bolo Rei – a type of cake
Candy canes
Christmas cake
Christmas pudding
Chap chye – a vegetable stew
Devil's curry – from the Eurasian tradition
Egg salad
Steamboat – a hotpot dish for communal
Jiaozi
Kue semprong
Pineapple tart
Semur
Vindaloo – a spicy Goan curry made usually with pork


== Malta ==
Panettone – from the Italian tradition
Fruitcake – from British influence
Christmas/Yule log (cake) – a log (similar to a tree's) that is made from chocolate and candied fruits
Mince Pies – from British influence
Timpana – traditionally served as a starter
Roast Turkey – from British influence


== Mexico ==

Meat
Roasted turkey – stuffed, roasted turkey served with gravy.
Glazed ham – ham glazed with honey or sugar dressed with cherries and pineapples.
Jamón (Spanish Dry-Cured Ham)
Lechon
Seafood
Bacalao – cod Basque style. Traditionally eaten in the central and southern states of Mexico.
Shrimp – cocktail or prepared in Torrejas (dried shrimp pancakes)
Octopus – cocktail
Crab
Stews
Menudo – a Christmas morning tradition in northwestern states, Menudo is a tripe and hominy soup. Menudo is often prepared the night before (Christmas Eve) as its cooking time can take up to 5 hours.
Pozole – hominy soup with added pork
Salads and other side dishes
Tamales – can sometimes replace the traditional turkey or Bacalao with romeritos, particularly in northern and southern parts of Mexico.
Ensalada Navideña – Christmas salad with apples, raisins, pecans, and marshmallows.
Ensalada de Noche Buena – Christmas Eve salad
Ensalada Rusa – potato salad, particularly popular in northern states.
Romeritos – also a Christmas tradition of the central region, romeritos are small green leaves similar to rosemary mixed generally with mole and potatoes.
Sweets
Buñuelo – fried sweet pastry
Capirotada – bread pudding
Turrón
Cocada – coconut candy
Volteado de piña – pineapple upside-down cake. Turned-over cake with cherries and pineapples.
Carlota de Chocolate – cake
Mantecados and polvorones – crumbly cakes
Marzipan, almond cakes
Pan dulce – sweet rolls
Churros
Fresh Fruit
Tejocotes
Guayabas
Caña de azucar - Sugar cane
Drinks
Champurrado – thick hot chocolate
Chocolate – hot chocolate
Cidra – apple cider
Atole – corn based drink
Rompope – similar to eggnog
Ponche Navideño – a hot, sweet drink made with apples, sugar cane, prunes and tejocotes. For grown-ups, ponche is never complete without its "piquete" – either tequila or rum


== Netherlands ==
Banket
Mandarin orange
Marzipan
Mixed spice
Mulled wine
Oliebol (more widely considered as a New Years' classic)
Speculaas
Kerstkransjes
Rollade


== New Zealand ==

Cherries
Christmas pudding
Christmas mince pies
Ham
Hāngī
Lamb
Lollies (candy) such as candy canes
Pavlova
Potato salad
Seafood
Strawberries
Trifle
Wine


== Norway ==

Akevitt – Akvavit, a spirit flavored with spices like caraway and aniseed
Gløgg – mulled wine
Julepølse – pork sausage made with powdered ginger, cloves, mustard seeds and nutmeg. Served steamed or roasted.
Pinnekjøtt – salted, dried, and sometimes smoked lamb's ribs which are rehydrated and then steamed, traditionally over birch branches
Svineribbe – pork belly roasted whole with the skin on. Usually served with red or pickled cabbage, gravy and boiled potatoes.
Risgrøt – Christmas rice porridge with an almond hidden inside
Julebrus – Norwegian soft drink, usually with a festive label on the bottle. It is brewed by most Norwegian breweries, as a Christmas drink for minors.
Julekake – Norwegian yeast cake with dried fruits and spices
Sosisser – small Christmas sausages
Medisterkaker – large meatballs made from a mix of pork meat and pork fat
Raudkål/Rødkål – sweet and sour red cabbage, as a side dish
Kålrabistappe/Kålrotstappe – Purée of rutabaga, as a side dish
Peparkake/Pepperkake – gingerbread-like spice cookies flavoured with black pepper
Lussekatter – St. Lucia Buns with saffron
Multekrem – a dessert consisting of cloudberries and whipped cream
Riskrem – Risalamande


== Palestine ==
Knafeh
Maqluba
Mujaddara
Warbat
Zalabiyeh


== Panama ==
Arroz con Pollo
Tamales
Ham
Turkey
Grapes
Fruit cake
Egg nog
Potato salad
Pan de Rosca
Pan Bon
Spaghetti


== Paraguay ==
Apple cider
Beef tongue sometimes covered in vinaigrette
Cider
Clericó (citric alcoholic drink made out of a mix of fruits and wine)
Roasted chicken
Potato salad
Roast pork
Sopa paraguaya


== Philippines ==

Adobo
Almondigas (meatballs)
Arroz valenciana
Bibingka – traditional dessert made with rice flour, sugar, clarified butter and coconut milk; baked in layers and topped with butter and sugar.
Biko
Buko salad (young coconut salad)
Caldereta
Callos
Castañas (roasted chestnuts)
Champorado
Chicken galantina
Chicken pastel
Churro
Crema de fruta
Embutido
Fruitcake
Fruit salad
Filipino spaghetti
Ham
Hamonado
Inihaw
Kinutil
Leche flan
Lechon
Lengua estofado
Lumpia
Mango float
Macaroni salad
Mechado
Membrilyo
Menudo
Morcon
Paelya
Pancit
Puto bumbong – a purple-coloured Filipino dessert made of sweet rice cooked in hollow bamboo tubes placed on a special steamer-cooker. When cooked, they are spread with margarine and sprinkled with sugar and grated coconut.
Queso de bola (edam cheese)
Relyenong bangus (stuffed milkfish)
Sapin-sapin
Suman
Tsokolate
Turon
Ube halaya


== Poland ==
On 24 December, Christmas Eve, twelve dishes are served as a reminder of the Twelve Apostles. Polish people often do not eat meat on this day; instead, they choose from a variety of fish and vegetable dishes. The meal begins when the first star is seen.

Barszcz (beetroot soup) with uszka (small dumplings) - a classic Polish Christmas starter.
Pierogi with sauerkraut and forest mushrooms; filled with cottage cheese and potatoes
Zupa rybna – fish soup
Żurek – soup made of soured rye flour and meat
Zupa grzybowa – mushroom soup made of various forest mushrooms
Bigos – savory stew of cabbage and meat
Kompot – traditional drink a light, refreshing drink most often made of dried or fresh fruit boiled in water with sugar and left to cool and infuse.
Gołąbki – cabbage rolls
Pieczarki marynowane – marinated mushrooms
Kartofle gotowane – simple boiled potatoes sprinkled with parsley or dill
Kulebiak – with fish or cabbage and wild mushrooms filling
Ryba smażona or ryba po grecku – fried fish laid under layers of fried shredded carrots, onions, root celery and leek
Sałatka jarzynowa – salad made with boiled potatoes and carrots with fresh peas, sweetcorn, dill cucumber, and boiled egg, mixed with mayonnaise.
Łamaniec – type of flat and rather hard pancake that is soaked in warm milk with poppy seeds. Eaten in eastern regions such as around * Białystok
Makowiec – poppy seed roll


== Portugal ==

Bacalhau – codfish
Cabrito assado – roasted goat
Borrego assado – roasted lamb
Polvo cozido – boiled octopus
Polvo à lagareiro - dish based on octopus, olive oil, potatoes (batatas a murro), grelos and garlic.
Carne de Vinha d' Alhos – mainly served in Madeira – pork dish
Bolo de mel – mainly served in Madeira - Cake made with molasses
Bolo Rei (king cake) – a beautifully decorated fluffy fruitcake
Bolo-Rei escangalhado (broken king cake) – it is like the first one, but has also cinnamon and chilacayote jam (doce de gila)
Bolo-Rainha (queen cake) – similar to Bolo-Rei, but with only nuts, raisins and almonds
Bolo-Rei de chocolate – it is like the Bolo-Rei, but has less (or no) fruit, nuts, chilacayote jam and many chocolate chips
Broa castelar – a small, soft and thin cake made of sweet potato and orange
Fatias douradas – slices of pan bread, soaked in egg with sugar, fried and sprinkled with powdered sugar and cinnamon
Rabanadas – they are like fatias douradas, but made with common bread
Aletria – composed of pasta, milk, butter, sugar, eggs, lemon peel, cinnamon powder and salt
Formigos – a delicious dessert made with sugar, eggs, pieces of bread, almonds, port wine and cinnamon powder
Filhós / Filhozes / Filhoses – depending on the region, they may be thin or fluffy pieces of a fried dough made of eggs, honey, orange, lemon, flour and anise, sprinkled - or not with icing sugar
Coscorões – thin squares of a fried orange flavoured dough
Azevias de grão, batata-doce ou gila – deep fried thin dough pastries filled with a delicious cream made of chickpea, sweet potato or chilacayote, powdered with sugar and cinnamon
Tarte de amêndoa – almond pie
Tronco de Natal – Christmas log – a Swiss roll, resembling a tree's trunk, filled with chocolate cream, decorated with chocolate and mini – 2 cm Christmas trees
Lampreia de ovos – a sweet made of eggs, well decorated
Sonhos – an orange flavoured fried yeast dough, powdered with icing sugar
Velhoses – they are like the sonhos, but made with pumpkin
Bolo de Natal – Christmas cake
Pudim de Natal – Christmas pudding, similar to flan
Vinho quente – mulled wine made with boiled wine, egg yolk, sugar and cinnamon
Turkey – on the island of Terceira, turkey has recently taken over as the traditional Christmas dish over Bacalhau, due to the influence of American culture on the island, home to the United States Air Force's 65th Air Base Wing.


== Puerto Rico (U.S.) ==
Arroz con gandules – yellow-rice, pigeon peas, olives, capers, pieces of pork, spices and sofrito cooked in the same pot.
Escabeche – pickled green bananas or cassava and chicken gizzards.
Macaroni salad – with canned tuna and peppers.
Morcilla – blood sausage.
Pasteles – Puerto Rican tamle made from milk, broth, root vegetables, squash, green banana, plantain dough, stuffed with meat, and wrapped in banana leaves.
Hallaca – tamale made from grated cassava and stuffed with meat wrapped in banana leaves.
Pastelón – sweet plantain "lasagna".
Pig roast – Puerto Rico is famous for their pig roast. It is also a part (along with arroz con gandules) of their national dish.
Potato salad – most commonly made with apples, chorizo and hard-boiled eggs. Potatoes are sometimes replaced with cassava.
Drinks:

Bilí – Spanish limes or cherries fermented in rum with spices, brown sugar, citrus peels, bay leaves, avocado leaves, often cucumber, ginger, and coconut shells.
Coquito – spiced coconut eggnog.
Coquito de guayaba - spiced guava eggnog with cream cheese or coconut milk added.
Piña colada
Rum punch – rum, orange liqueur, grenadine, ginger ale, grapefruit juice served with fruit, lemon and lime slices.
La Danza – champagne with passion fruit juice, orange liqueur, lime juice, lemon juice, and strawberry juice.
Dessert:

Arroz con dulce – Spiced coconut and raisin rice pudding.
Bread pudding – soaked in coconut milk and served with a guava rum sauce.
Dulce de cassabanana – musk cucumber cooked in syrup topped with walnuts and sour cream on the side.
Dulce de papaya con queso – Fermented green papaya with spices and sugar syrup served with ausubal cheese or fresh white cheese.
Flancocho – Crème caramel with a layer of cream cheese and Puerto Rican style spongecake underneath.
Majarete – rice and coconut custard. Made with coconut cream, marshmallows, milk, rice flour, sugar, vanilla and sour orange leaves with cinnamon served on top.
Rum cake
Tembleque – a pudding made with cornstarch, coconut cream, sugar, milk, orange blossom water and coconut milk.
Turrón – Sesame brittle or almond brittle.
Mantecaditos – Puerto Rican shortbread cookies. Made with shortening, coconut butter, flour, almond flour, vanilla, nutmeg and almond extract. They are usually filled with guava jam or pineapple jam in the middle.
Natilla – Milk, coconut cream and egg yolk custard made with additional cinnamon, cornstarch, sugar, vanilla, lemon zest and orange blossom water. Served in individual ramekins with cinnamon sprinkled on top.


== Romania ==
Romanian Christmas foods are mostly pork-based dishes. Five days before Christmas, Romanians are celebrating the Ignat Day, a religious holy day dedicated to the Holy Martyr Ignatius Theophorus, associated with a practice that takes place especially on villages scattered around the country: the ritual of slaughtering the pigs. And they are using everything from the pigs: from their blood to their ears. Five days later their tables are filled not only with generous pork roasts but also with:
Piftie – pork jelly, made only with pork meat, vegetables and garlic
Lebăr – liver sausages, a local variety of liverwurst
Caltaboș – sausages made from organs
Cârnaţi – pork-based sausages
Sângerete – blood sausages
Tobă – head cheese made from various cuttings of pork, liver boiled, diced and "packed" in pork stomach like a salami
Sarmale – rolls of cabbage pickled in brine and filled with meat and rice (see sarma)
Salată de boeuf – a more recent dish, but highly popular, this type of salad uses boiled vegetables and meat (beef, poultry, even ham). It can include potatoes, carrots, pickled red peppers and cucumbers, egg whites bits. Everything is mixed together with mayonnaise and mustard.
Cozonac, the Romanian equivalent of panettone or sweet bread.
Strong spirits: Palinka, Rachiu, Ţuică


== Russia ==
Borscht
Kutya


== San Marino ==

Bustrengo


== Serbia and Montenegro ==

Česnica – Christmas soda bread with a silver coin to bring health and good luck baked in the bread.
Koljivo – boiled wheat which is used liturgically in the Eastern Orthodox and Greek Catholic Churches.
Riblja čorba for Christmas Eve


== South Africa ==
Christmas is in the summer in South Africa, so many summer fruits such as watermelon and cantaloupes are enjoyed at this time. Popular desserts include trifle, melktert and peppermint crisp tart. Many people in South Africa hold Braai barbecues for Christmas or New Year's Day.

Beef tongue
Gammon
Potato salad
Garden Salad
Turducken
Turkey
Braaivleis
Boerewors
Potjiekos
Breyani
Bobotie
Meatballs
Fried chicken
Trifle
Fruitcake
Mince Pies Influenced by British tradition, mince pies filled with dried fruits and spices are enjoyed over the holidays.
Christmas pudding
Ice cream
Melktert
Peppermint crisp tart – fridge tart made with peppermint crisp, caramel treat and tennis biscuits
Yogurt tart – fridge tart
Cookies
Hertzoggies
Lamingtons
Watermelon
Melon
Mango
Pineapple
Strawberries
Peanuts
Lollies such as candy canes


== Spain ==
Jamón, jamón ibérico (Spanish dry-cured ham).
Fish: oven gilt-head bream, oven sea bass, elvers.
Seafood: Langostinos (king prawn), Shrimp, Lobster, Crab.
Meat: Roasted turkey, Roasted lamb.
Sweets:  
Turrón
Yema – egg-based dessert
Mantecados and polvorones – crumbly cakes
Marzipan – almond cakes
King cake known as roscón de Reyes in Spanish and tortell in Catalan.
Frutas de Aragón - a confit of fruit covered in chocolate
Peladillas - sugared almonds
Churros
cider


== Sri Lanka ==
Kanji
Lamprais
Pol Pani


== Sweden ==

Julbord - Christmas smorgasbord ("Christmas table"), a catch-all term for all the dishes served during Christmas Eve:
Köttbullar – Swedish meatballs
Julskinka – Christmas ham
Dopp i grytan ("dipping in the kettle") – dipping bread slices in the ham broth after boiling the Christmas ham.
Prinskorv – small hot dog sausages
Fläskkorv – big pork sausage
Isterband – smoked fresh pork sausage
Revbensspjäll – spare ribs
Inlagd sill – pickled herring (usually of different types)
Gravad lax – lox
Janssons frestelse ("Jansson's temptation") – warm, scalloped potato casserole with "ansjovis" (a type of swedish spiced and pickled european sprat), not to be confused with anchovies.
Vörtlimpa – Swedish rye bread with grated orange peel made for Christmas, with or without raisins.
Knäckebröd – dry crisp bread
Rödkål – sweet and sour red cabbage, as a side dish
Grönkål – sweet and sour kale as a side dish
Brunkål ("brown cabbage") – cabbage flavoured with syrup, hence the name
Rödbetor – sliced beet root
An array of cheeses – bondost, herrgårdsost, prästost, mesost (hard goat milk cheese)
Mumma – mixed drink
Lutfisk – lye-fish (whitefish) that has been boiled served with white gravy
Julmust – a traditional, very sweet, stout-like, Christmas soft drink, originally intended as an alternative to alcohol beverage called Mumma
Glögg – mulled wine
Knäck or Christmas butterscotch – Christmas toffee
Pepparkakor (gingerbread) – brown cookies flavoured with a variety of traditional Christmas spices
Julost – Christmas cheese
Julgröt – Christmas rice pudding with an almond hidden inside
Lussekatter – Saint Lucy saffron buns
Limpa bread – orange and rye spice bread


== Switzerland ==
Anisbrötli
Basler Läckerli
Baumstriezel
Cardon argenté épineux genevois
Fondue
Grittibänz
Lebkuchen
Mailänderli
Pain d'épices
Panettone
Spitzbube
Tirggel


== Thailand ==
Khao khluk kapi
Pad see ew
Pad thai
Tom yum


== Trinidad and Tobago ==
In Trinidad and Tobago traditional meals consists of generous helpings of baked ham, pastelles, black fruit cake, sweet breads, along with traditional drinks such as sorrel, ginger beer, and ponche de crème. The ham is the main item on the Christmas menu with sorrel to accompany it.

Christmas ham
Sorrel
Pastelles also known as Hallacas
Ponche de crème – a version of eggnog
Black cake


== Ukraine ==
Orthodox and Roman Catholic Christians in Ukraine traditionally have two Christmas dinners. The first is a Lent Dinner, it is held on January 6 and should consist of meatless dishes. The second is a Christmas Festive dinner held on January 7, when the meat dishes and alcohol are already allowed on the table. The dinner normally has 12 dishes which represent Jesus's 12 disciples. Both Christmas dinners traditionally include a number of authentic Ukrainian dishes, which have over thousand-year history and date back to pagan times.

Kutia
Uzvar
Varenyky
Borshch
Deruny
Pampushky
Holubtsi
Makivnyk


== United Kingdom ==

In the United Kingdom, what is now regarded as the traditional meal consists of roast turkey with cranberry sauce, served with roast potatoes and parsnips and other vegetables, followed by Christmas pudding, a heavy steamed pudding made with dried fruit, suet, and very little flour. Other roast meats may be served, and in the nineteenth century the traditional roast was goose. The same carries over to Ireland with some variations.

Beef Wellington (alternative main course)
Brandy butter
Bread sauce
Brussels sprouts
Candy canes
Chocolate yule log
Christmas cake
Christmas ham (usually a honey or marmalade glazed roast or boiled gammon joint)
Christmas pudding
Cranberry sauce
Devils on horseback
Dundee cake (traditional Scottish fruit cake)
Gingerbread
Mince pies
Mulled wine
Nut roast (a popular vegetarian alternative)
Pigs in blankets (Chipolata sausages wrapped in bacon)
Roast turkey
Roasted chestnuts
Roast duck
Roast goose
Roast pheasant
Spiced beef (traditionally served in Ireland and Northern Ireland)
Trifle
Tunis Cake
Twelfth Night Cake (traditionally eaten on the final day of Christmas)


== United States ==

Apple cider
Boiled custard
Candy canes
Champagne, or sparkling apple cider
Chocolate fudge
Christmas cookies
Cranberry sauce
Eggnog
Fish as part of the Feast of the Seven Fishes
Fruitcake
Gingerbread, often in the form of a gingerbread house or gingerbread man
Christmas ham
Hawaiian bread
Hot buttered rum
Hot chocolate
Mashed potatoes
Mixed nuts, chestnuts, dried figs, dried dates
Oyster stew, composed of oysters simmered in cream or milk and butter.
Persimmon pudding
Pie
Apple pie
Pecan pie
Pumpkin pie
Sweet potato pie
Pork Loin
Red velvet cake
Roast Beef, often made using more expensive/luxury cuts such as Beef Tenderloin or Prime Rib
Russian tea cakes
Stuffing, sometimes referred to as “dressing.”
Sweet Potatoes, often roasted with sugar and spices (“candied yams”) or baked into a casserole
Tom and Jerry
Turkey, perhaps the archetypal main course in the traditional American Christmas Dinner.
Other fowl - especially duck, goose, chicken or pheasant - sometimes take the place of turkey as a main course, but are much less common.
See also: Thanksgiving Dinner (many dishes tend to be similar)


== Venezuela ==

Hallaca – rectangle-shaped meal made of maize, filled with beef, pork, chicken, olives, raisins and caper, and wrapped in plantain leaves and boiled to cook.
Pan de jamón – ham-filled bread with olives and raisins and often sliced cheese.
Dulce de lechosa – dessert made of cooked sliced unripe papaya in reduced sugar syrup
Ensalada de gallina – salad made of potato, carrot, apple and shredded chicken (hen usually home or locally raised as opposed to store bought chicken)
Pernil – commonly referred to as roast pork


== Vietnam ==
Bò 7 món
Bún thịt nướng
Canh chua
Chả giò
Cháo
Gỏi cuốn
Lẩu
Pho
Thịt gà nướng
Vietnamese tea


== See also ==
Christmas dinner
 Food portal
 Holidays portal


== References ==


== External links ==