This is the list of episodes for the Japanese cooking television series Ryōri no Tetsujin, known among English-speaking audiences as Iron Chef, produced by Fuji Television. The series is a cooking competition in which a challenger chef "battles" one of the resident "Iron Chefs" by cooking at least one dish in a one-hour time slot based on a theme ingredient.
Not included in the lists below is a special episode titled "The Legend of Michiba", aired on January 5, 1996. This special episode was made exclusively for English-speaking audiences, especially "Iron Chef fans in the States."
For consistency, all Japanese names are in Western order, macroned with Hepburn romanization. All other East Asian names, on the other hand, are in Eastern order. Also, for each of the non-Japanese East Asian challengers, as much as possible, the name used is the romanization used by either the English-dubbed version of the show or any English language publication or website. Otherwise, the romanization used for the Chinese names is derived from the Mandarin Chinese pronunciation and Pinyin romanization of the name (the episode involving the only Korean to compete in the show has already been dubbed in English).
All East Asian challengers, except those with Wikipedia articles, will have their names in kanji in parentheses upon first mention in the list. For the non-Japanese East Asian challengers, the Japanese pronunciation of the name as used in the show (or at least the name used by Chairman Kaga, if subtitled without voiceovers, in the English-dubbed versions) is also included.
In the case of East Asians with mixed Chinese-Japanese heritage, such as Chen Kenichi, they follow the same criteria as the Chinese names (i.e. Eastern order and Japanese pronunciation guide beside kanji).


== 1993 ==
All episodes from this year are half an hour long, as opposed to at least an hour in the following years.

^1  This is the first battle featuring a foreign challenger.
^2  This is the first battle in which a challenger won against the Iron Chef, as well as the first episode after the preliminary battles and Honorary Iron Chef titles were scrapped.


== 1994 ==

The year ended with the 1994 Mr. Iron Chef competition; Part 1 aired on December 23, and Part 2 aired on January 2, 1995. Both parts were never dubbed in English, and only Part 2 is widely available. This tournament featured winning challengers from previous episodes, each representing four different styles of cooking (Chinese, Italian, French, and Japanese), battling against each other. The winner faced off against Michiba.
Jacques Borie was offered a spot as the French challenger, but declined. Artur Rütter was then asked, but the production staff was frustrated over him suddenly cancelling the offer, due to "a full restaurant reservation for Christmas". Shimizu was ultimately selected, with the approval of regular customers.


== 1995 ==

The last episode of 1995 covered the first half of 1995 Mr. Iron Chef competition. The winner would battle Michiba, who was about to retire as a regular Iron Chef.


== 1996 ==
The first episode of 1996 covered the second half of 1995 Mr. Iron Chef competition. This would be Michiba's last battle as a regular Iron Chef.

The last episode of 1996 is the New Year's Eve episode wherein 100 judges were said to have sampled the osechi New Year food prepared by Michiba and Nakamura, which took 100 minutes and 10 assistants each to make, with the battle concluding at midnight on New Year's. The theme ingredients were decided at the Yabusame venue set up in front of the Odaiba FCG building. Four of them were assigned to three groups; Meat (Beef, Chicken, Duck, and Pork), Vegetables (Carrot, Radish, Sweet Potato, and Green Pepper), and Fish (Salmon, Yellowtail, Octopus, and Spiny Lobster).


== 1997 ==


== 1998 ==


== 1999 ==


== Specials (2000–2002) ==


=== Specials notes ===
The Millennium Cup, occurring three months after the last regular battle, introduced two "new" Iron Chefs in the persons of Yūji Wakiya and Seigo Mitani as successors to Iron Chefs Sakai and Chen. Both actually never battled since their introduction. And while there were two battles, all four chefs involved were competing to have one of their dishes be declared as the "Millennium Dish." Although Bouchet lost his battle with Michiba, his beef main course was declared the "Millennium Dish."
The first part of the New York Special saw Iron Chefs Morimoto, Sakai, Kobe and Honorary Iron Chef Michiba visit the city. During the Iron Chefs' visit to the Zagat weekend home, Tim and Nina Zagat had arranged a battle between Morimoto and Flay. Also included in the first part were Kobe and Sakai's visit to an Asian cooking class in the Culinary Institute of America and Morimoto and Michiba's guesting in an episode of Doorknock Dinners. Gordon Elliott, the host of that show, would also serve as the English-speaking host for Flay and Morimoto's battle in the second half of the special alongside Kaga.
The 21st Century Battles were held especially to usher in the beginning of the 21st century, and brought back two previous challengers. The first was prolific guest Toshirō Kandagawa, who shaved himself bald to atone for his antagonistic role in the past. The second, Bobby Flay, was brought back to fulfill a clamor for a rematch against Morimoto as according to several reports, Flay did not take his loss very well, even complaining about the treatment against him in that battle (the show even cited a Time magazine article to bring home the point).
In the events that led to the Japan Cup, Chairman Kaga (the character) had died due to puffer fish liver poisoning. A memorial service was held before the new chairman, Kaga's equally flamboyant nephew, played by actor Masahiro Motoki was introduced. The Japan Cup, launched to keep the tradition of Kitchen Stadium alive, held and recorded at the Tokyo Big Sight. Chen was chosen to represent Chinese cuisine while the selection of representatives for French, Italian, and Japanese cuisines was opened to "unknown nameless chefs." There were only two battles that were covered in full: Chen's semifinal battle and finals between Chen and Nonaga, only highlights of Nonaga's semifinal battle were shown due to time constraints. Takeshi Kaga, the actor portraying the character Chairman Kaga, was still alive at the time of the Japan Cup (and still is as of 2024, according to IMDb), his character was killed off due to commitments he had at the time that prevented him from reprising his role. The story element of the "death" of Kaga's character was ignored in Iron Chef America: Battle of the Masters, as according to that show's storyline, it was Chairman Kaga himself who sent Sakai and Morimoto to America to grace the opening of a new Gourmet Academy there.


== Revival series (2012–2013) ==
On October 26, 2012, Fuji TV revived the original Iron Chef franchise, this time simply using the English name Iron Chef (アイアンシェフ). Actor Hiroshi Tamaki assumed the role as the new Chairman in this revival. For the line-up of Iron Chefs, Yuji Wakiya became the official Iron Chef Chinese, while Yōsuke Suga was selected as the new Iron Chef French instead of Seigo Mitani; Jun Kurogi was chosen as the new Iron Chef Japanese. Yukio Hattori would reprise his role as commenter, guided by a set of culinary experts.
Unlike the previous series, the 2012 revival had challengers nominated by prominent personalities, such as past Iron Chefs. Through public vote, challengers who won battles would have a chance to officially become future Iron Chefs.
For consistency, all Japanese names are in Western order, macroned with Hepburn romanization. All other East Asian names, on the other hand, are in Eastern order. Also, for each of the non-Japanese East Asian challengers, as much as possible, the romanization used for the Chinese names are derived from the Mandarin Chinese pronunciation and Pinyin romanization of the name.
All East Asian challengers, except those with Wikipedia articles, have their names in kanji in parentheses upon first mention in the list. For the non-Japanese Asian challengers, the Japanese pronunciation of the name as used in the show is also included.
In the case of East Asians with mixed Chinese-Japanese heritage, such as Chen Kenichi, they follow the same criteria as the Chinese names (i.e. Eastern order and Japanese pronunciation guide beside kanji).


=== 2012 ===

The last episode of 2012 is the New Year's Eve episode as the Mr. Iron Chef competition. It was broadcast live for six hours and there were seven judges for each battle. It was broadcast as alternative programming to NHK's hugely popular Kōhaku Uta Gassen.


=== 2013 ===


== References ==


== External links ==
List of episodes held at The Iron Chef Exchange
Japanese Iron Chef fan site
Transcription/Translation of the Iron Chef Japan Cup 2002
WWWJDIC (Monash University server)