An election for the mayor of New York City was held on November 4, 2025. Democratic state assemblyman Zohran Mamdani won the election with 50.78% of the vote, defeating Republican activist Curtis Sliwa and independent former Democratic governor Andrew Cuomo. This election featured the highest turnout for a New York City mayoral election in decades, mainly due to significant young voter registration. Mamdani is scheduled to succeed Democratic incumbent Eric Adams on January 1, 2026. He is slated to become the first Muslim and first South Asian mayor of New York City, as well as its youngest since 1892.
Adams initially ran for a second term (at first as a Democrat, and later as an independent), but withdrew from the race in September 2025. He remained on the voting ballot because he ended his campaign too late for his name to be removed. Cuomo, pursuing a political comeback after he resigned as New York governor in 2021, was the frontrunner for the Democratic nomination as of early June 2025; however, he was defeated by Mamdani in the Democratic primary in a major upset. Following his primary loss, Cuomo launched an independent campaign. Sliwa, the Republican nominee in the 2021 New York City mayoral election, ran unopposed for his party's nomination.
Mamdani ran on a democratic socialist platform focusing on affordability. Cuomo ran on a broadly centrist platform with a focus on crime and combating antisemitism while also being endorsed by Donald Trump, while Sliwa criticized both from the political right and advocated tough on crime policies. Mamdani became the first mayoral candidate since 1969 to receive more than one million votes, and the race was the first since 1969 to attract more than two million votes in total.


== Background ==
Eric Adams was elected mayor of New York City in the 2021 mayoral election, narrowly winning the Democratic primary election and defeating the Republican nominee, Curtis Sliwa, in the general election in a landslide victory. In September 2024, a series of investigations into the Adams administration emerged. Adams was indicted on federal charges of bribery, fraud, and soliciting illegal foreign campaign donations. Adams pleaded not guilty to the charges.
Adams was the first New York City mayor to be charged with crimes while in office, and he received several calls to resign before the end of his term. An early October 2024 poll conducted by Marist College found his approval rating to be just 26%, and found that 69% of voters thought he should resign. In February 2025, the United States Department of Justice under the second Trump administration instructed federal prosecutors to drop all charges against Adams. The case against Adams was dismissed with prejudice in April 2025.


== Democratic primary ==

Primary elections for the Democratic Party were held on June 24, 2025, with the early voting period beginning on June 14. In New York City, primaries are held using ranked-choice voting, also known as instant-runoff voting. In March 2025, former New York Governor Andrew Cuomo, pursuing a political comeback after he resigned as governor in 2021 amid a sexual harassment scandal, announced his mayoral campaign; polls showed Cuomo leading all other mayoral candidates among Democratic voters following the announcement of his intention to run. In April 2025, Adams announced that he would exit the Democratic primary and instead seek re-election as an independent. Leading up to the election, polls showed that Cuomo continued to be the narrow frontrunner in the Democratic primary, with Assemblymember Zohran Mamdani in second place; one June poll found that Mamdani had a narrow lead over Cuomo.

On June 24, Mamdani defeated Cuomo, City Comptroller Brad Lander, and eight other candidates to become the Democratic nominee for mayor. Mamdani's victory was considered a major upset. Mamdani suggested imposing a flat 2% tax on New Yorkers who earn more than $1 million and a number of housing plans, such as a promise to freeze rents on rent-stabilized units, extensive public housing development and refurbishment, and stricter regulation of landlords, upsetting some in the luxury real estate market. Nevertheless, Cuomo, who also filed to run on the independent "Fight and Deliver" ballot line, remained on the general election ballot.


=== Candidates ===


==== Nominee ====


==== Eliminated in primary ====
Adrienne Adams, speaker of the New York City Council (2022–present) from the 28th district (2017–present)
Selma Bartholomew, educator
Michael Blake, former state assemblymember from the 79th district (2015–2021), candidate for public advocate in 2019, and candidate for New York's 15th congressional district in 2020
Andrew Cuomo, former governor of New York (2011–2021) and U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development (1997–2001)
Brad Lander, New York City comptroller (2022–present)
Zellnor Myrie, state senator from the 20th district (2019–present)
Paperboy Prince, artist and perennial candidate
Jessica Ramos, state senator from the 13th district (2019–present)
Scott Stringer, former New York City comptroller (2014–2021) and candidate for mayor in 2021
Whitney Tilson, hedge fund manager


==== Withdrawn ====
Eric Adams, incumbent mayor (running as an independent; later withdrawn)


==== Declined ====
Jennifer Jones Austin, lawyer and nonprofit CEO
Jamaal Bowman, former U.S. representative from New York's 16th congressional district (2021–2025) (endorsed Mamdani)
Justin Brannan, city councilmember from the 47th district (2018–present) (running for comptroller)
Kathryn Garcia, New York State director of Operations (2021–present), former commissioner of the New York City Department of Sanitation (2014–2020), and candidate for mayor in 2021
Dan Goldman, U.S. representative from New York's 10th congressional district (2023–present) (endorsed Myrie)
Letitia James, attorney general of New York (2019–present) and former New York City public advocate (2014–2018) (running for re-election, co-endorsed Adrienne Adams, Lander, Mamdani, and Myrie)
Mark Levine, Manhattan borough president (2020–present) (running for comptroller)
Yuh-Line Niou, former state assemblymember from the 65th district (2017–2022) and candidate for New York's 10th congressional district in 2022 (endorsed Mamdani)
Antonio Reynoso, Brooklyn borough president (2022–present) (running for re-election, co-endorsed Adrienne Adams, Lander, and Mamdani)
Ritchie Torres, U.S. representative from New York's 15th congressional district (2021–present) (endorsed Cuomo)
Jumaane Williams, New York City public advocate (2019–present), candidate for lieutenant governor in 2018, and candidate for governor in 2022 (running for re-election, co-endorsed Adrienne Adams, Lander, and Mamdani)


=== Results ===


== Republican primary ==
Curtis Sliwa won the Republican Party primary, having run uncontested, becoming the Republican nominee for mayor. Sliwa was the Republican mayoral nominee in 2021 but was defeated by Eric Adams in a landslide.


=== Candidates ===


==== Nominee ====


==== Declined ====
Eric Adams, incumbent Democratic mayor (2022–present) (ran as an independent; later withdrawn)
Joe Borelli, former minority leader of the New York City Council (2021–2025) from the 51st District (2015–2025)
John Catsimatidis, CEO of Gristedes and D'Agostino Supermarkets and candidate for mayor in 2013 (endorsed Adams, then Sliwa, then Cuomo)
Rudy Giuliani, former mayor (1994–2001) and former U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York (1983–1989)
Jim Walden, antitrust and government law attorney (ran as an independent; later withdrawn)


== Third parties and independents ==


=== Independents ===
On April 3, 2025, Eric Adams announced his exit from the Democratic primary and instead ran in the general election as an independent. Adams circulated petitions to run on an "EndAntiSemitism" ballot line, as well as a "Safe&Affordable" ballot line; however, the Board of Elections limited independent candidates to one ballot line each; major party candidates can otherwise appear on multiple lines. Adams formally selected the latter line on August 22. On September 28, Adams withdrew his candidacy from the general election, but his name remained on the ballot.
Andrew Cuomo formed a minor political party called the "Fight and Deliver Party" in May 2025. After Cuomo conceded the Democratic primary, he confirmed his intention to remain on the ballot on the "Fight and Deliver" ballot line. He then launched his independent campaign on July 14, 2025. The "Protect Animals" ballot line was newly created by Republican nominee Curtis Sliwa, with Sliwa as the nominee. Sliwa made animal rights a centerpiece of his campaign, accusing Animal Care Centers of NYC of mistreating animals, and advocating for no-kill shelters.
Attorney and first-time political candidate Jim Walden of Brooklyn Heights ran for mayor as a "business-minded technocrat" with an anti-corruption platform. Walden sued to challenge a law that bans the use of the words "independent" and "independence" in political party names. On September 2, he withdrew—although his name remained on the ballot—and encouraged other contenders to do the same to defeat Mamdani.


==== Other declared candidates ====
Joseph Hernandez, biotechnology entrepreneur


==== Withdrawn ====


==== Did not make the ballot ====
Jean Anglade, advocate
Kyle Gutierrez, college student
Abbey Laurel-Smith, perennial candidate
Paul Mailhot, organizer for the Socialist Workers Party
Montell Moseley, former education paraprofessional
Karen Stachel, musician


=== Working Families Party ===
The Working Families Party (WFP) often endorses Democratic Party nominees in general elections even if those nominees did not receive WFP support in their respective Democratic primaries. On May 30, 2025, the WFP endorsed Mamdani. The party instructed voters to rank Mamdani first, with Brad Lander second, Adrienne Adams third, Zellnor Myrie fourth, and Jessica Ramos fifth. Ana María Archila, co-director of the New York WFP, indicated that if Andrew Cuomo won the Democratic mayoral primary, the party would most likely nominate someone other than Cuomo for mayor. On June 6, the WFP removed Ramos from its slate after she endorsed Cuomo.


==== Nominee ====
Zohran Mamdani, state assemblymember from the 36th district (2021–present)


==== Withdrawn ====
Gowri Krishna, attorney


=== Conservative Party ===
The Conservative Party normally cross-endorses Republican candidates, as they did at the 2013 and 2017 mayoral elections. Curtis Sliwa described himself as differing with the party on a number of issues, including on abortion, LGBTQ rights, gun control, and COVID-19 restrictions. Paul Briscoe, a Brooklyn resident, had been the Conservative Party's initial selection for mayor, but he rejected the nomination, giving the Conservative Party 72 hours to find a replacement. The party selected Irene Estrada as a replacement candidate. Estrada is not affiliated with the Conservative Party; rather, she is a registered Democrat who was elected as a member of Bronx Community Board 11 as a Democrat. Estrada had launched several failed campaigns for higher office, including two failed State Assembly bids, two failed City Council bids, and the 2013 New York City Public Advocate election in which she ran as an independent on the "War Veterans" line (Estrada herself is not a veteran). In order to stand as a Conservative while still being a registered Democrat, she needed Wilson Pakula authorization.


==== Nominee ====
Irene Estrada, former member of Bronx Community Board 11 and Democratic candidate for New York City's 13th City Council district in 2021 and 2023


==== Withdrawn ====
Gonzalo Duran, vice chair of the Bronx Conservative Party (running for public advocate)


=== Reform Party ===
The Reform Party endorsed Joseph Hernandez, although he appeared on the ballot as an independent.


== Campaign ==


=== Campaign trail ===

After Zohran Mamdani won the Democratic primary in June 2025, several business executives reportedly began meeting with incumbent Eric Adams as they considered backing him in the general election. Jim Walden called for all "non-Mamdani" candidates to "coalesce" around one candidate in the weeks just before the election, in order to prevent vote splitting. Several Republicans in the weeks afterward pressured Curtis Sliwa to drop out in order to shore up support for Adams, but Sliwa repeated on July 7 that he would not. Walden later doubled down, pledging to drop out of the race by September if he was not the leading "non-Mamdani" candidate while giving an interview to CBS News on The Point. Walden would drop out of the race on September 2, again urging for a "one-on-one race" and calling Mamdani the "most dangerous" option for mayor.
On July 1, President Donald Trump voiced support for Adams, describing him as a "very good person" and stating that he "helped him out a little bit"—in reference to his corruption case being dropped by Trump's Department of Justice—while also threatening to arrest Mamdani. During an unrelated press conference, Adams commented that "anyone that is an elected or not should never interfere with federal authorities carrying out their functions". Trump also suggested the possibility of placing New York under federal control if Mamdani wins.
In September 2025, The New York Times began reporting that Adams had allegedly met in Florida with Steve Witkoff, an advisor to Trump, about receiving a position in the president's administration, specifically as an ambassador, in return for him dropping out and increasing the chances of Mamdani being defeated. Later reports suggested that Adams was giving serious consideration to the proposition despite public statements denying it; part of this consideration was whether or not he would have to resign from his position as mayor. Adams initially responded with a statement on September 5 that he would not be withdrawing from the race. Adams later withdrew his candidacy on September 28, stating that his campaign was "underserved, the marginalized, the abandoned and betrayed by government" as both the state and national Democratic parties increasingly coalesced around Mamdani instead of Adams.
Republican candidate Curtis Sliwa, in response to Trump's comments regarding the race, portrayed himself as an anti-Trump Republican, saying that "[Trump] should stay out of [New York politics]", while running a grassroots campaign. By early August, Sliwa began reworking his own personal style and his platform, foregoing his iconic red beret, claiming it had become too much of a "defining issue" distracting from his campaign. Additionally, Sliwa started attempting to court labor unions, portraying himself as pro-worker and anti-fat cat. As the race entered its final weeks, Sliwa came under increasing pressure from Andrew Cuomo, as well as Republican figures including Trump, to drop out of the race to bolster Cuomo's chances; however, he stated he would rather be executed and impaled on a stake than drop out and help Cuomo in any way.
Since launching his independent campaign, Cuomo sought to promote a centrist platform, stating socialism, specifically the brand Mamdani supports, "has never worked anywhere". Cuomo offered milder alternatives to some of Mamdani's policy platforms such as opposing free busses, arguing they would cost $900 million, instead proposing a $180 million bus subsidy paid for by an increased property tax. On August 6, it was reported by The New York Times that Cuomo had a phone call with Trump shortly after Trump met with New York Republicans about who they thought was the most likely candidate to potentially beat Mamdani, with a general consensus of a coalescing around a single candidate instead of a four-way split "non-Mamdani" vote. Cuomo's campaign initially issued a statement that the two did not talk about politics on the call, but later backtracked and claimed that the call never happened. Cuomo reportedly said about Trump, "I know, personally, he doesn't want to fight with me. Personally, I don't want to fight with him, right? So I don't think he's going to be eager to create a conflict with us". Trump formally endorsed Cuomo the day before the election alongside Elon Musk; this was met by dismay from his support base and was described as a "poison pill" and "final nail in the coffin" for his campaign due to just how unpopular both are with New York City Democrats. The endorsement was also seen as the culmination of weeks of campaigning by Cuomo to eat into Sliwa's voter base in order to close the gap with Mamdani, and was generally well received by the City's Republicans.
During his campaign, Mamdani used Hindi commercials and Indian Bollywood music to reach his South Asian American (Desi) voter base. Mamdani's victory in the Democratic primary galvanized the Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) to make more of a push to influence the Democratic Party, with the DSA convention in Chicago on August 7 primarily centered around standing and supporting more Mamdani-like candidates. Mamdani also sought to capitalize on Cuomo's call with Trump, calling it a "betrayal" of Democratic voters, and alleging that Cuomo and Trump are conspiring to "rig" the mayoral election against him, especially as Trump routinely questions Mamdani's status as a U.S. citizen.


=== Campaign controversies ===
In July 2025, The New York Times wrote that on Mamdani's unsuccessful 2009 application to Columbia University, he checked the race boxes "Asian" and "Black or African American". Mamdani confirmed that, but said his intent was to represent his Indian-Ugandan background given the limited options available, and not to improve his chances of admission. Some of Mamdani's opponents described his action as potentially fraudulent, while his defenders said it was legitimate, or at least trivial. Others said variously that it was comparable to Elon Musk claiming to be African American, illustrative of problems with race-conscious admissions, related to the specific history of South Asians in Africa, and a distraction from mayoral issues.
On July 8, four former NYPD officers filed individual suits against Adams and high-ranking NYPD officials. The plaintiffs had each served in leadership roles—chief of detectives, assistant chief of the criminal task force division, chief of professional standards, and second in command for internal affairs—and alleged in part that Adams enabled department corruption and retaliation for speaking out. Less than two weeks later, Tom Donlon, who had served as interim NYPD commissioner, filed suit against Adams and high-ranking NYPD officials, alleging that they had engaged in a "coordinated criminal conspiracy" to enrich themselves, prevented executive misconduct investigations, forged documents, and engaged in retaliation.
In August 2025, Cuomo falsely claimed that Mamdani lived in a rent-controlled apartment, and that Mamdani's tenancy was responsible for the fact that "somewhere last night in New York City, a single mother and her children slept at a homeless shelter." Mamdani responded that when he first began leasing his rent-stabilized apartment, which is not rent-controlled, he earned less than he does now, and he plans to move out in the future. The New York Times and ABC News wrote that Cuomo's attack reflects a larger debate on who should benefit from government regulation of housing costs, with housing experts and tenant advocates immediately panning Cuomo's proposal to means-test rent-stabilized apartments.
In October 2025, the New York Knicks sent a cease-and-desist letter to Mamdani after his campaign launched an ad using a logo with a significant resemblance to that of the Knicks. In a statement, the NBA team said they wanted to make it clear they "do not endorse Mr Mamdani for Mayor", and added that they "will pursue all legal remedies" to prevent further use of their copyrighted logo.
The mispronunciation of Mamdani's name by Cuomo was first noticed during the Democratic mayoral primary debate in 2025. In the general election debates, both Cuomo and Republican contender Curtis Sliwa mispronounced his name. American president Donald Trump and his press secretary Karoline Leavitt also had trouble with the last name. Billionaire Elon Musk intentionally misspelled Mamdani's name in his written endorsement for Cuomo, calling him "Mumdumi or whatever his name is." Even his political allies, such as Letitia James, Bill de Blasio, Carl Heastie, and John Samuelsen have mispronounced the name. Linguistics professor John McWhorter argued that the common mispronunciation of Mamdani's last name was a result of phonological assimilation. Mamdani criticized Cuomo for mispronouncing his names during debates, but also said that he doesn't "begrudge anyone who tries and gets it wrong." He further compared intentional mispronunciation of foreign names to the practice of othering. The Kashmir Times commented that, in contrast to former president Barack Obama, "Mamdani pronounces his own name slowly until others get it right."


==== Allegations of Islamophobia and antisemitism ====
Following his upset win in the Democratic primary, criticisms and attacks against Mamdani utilized Islamophobic, racist, or xenophobic content, and Islamophobic tropes, particularly with references to the 9/11 attacks and terrorism. These criticisms and attacks came from across the political spectrum, and sparked concern and debate over the usage of Islamophobia in mainstream American politics.
A number of Republican politicians attacked Mamdani referencing 9/11. U.S. Representative Nancy Mace wrote on X (formerly Twitter), "After 9/11 we said 'Never Forget.' I think we sadly have forgotten." Representative Marjorie Taylor Greene posted an image of the Statue of Liberty wearing a burqa. Others associated with Trumpism and the MAGA movement, including Laura Loomer, Charlie Kirk, and Donald Trump Jr., also attacked Mamdani in the context of 9/11. The Council on American–Islamic Relations (CAIR) noted a significant increase in Islamophobic content on X the day after Mamdani became the presumptive nominee, which was attributed to commentary from Republican figures. Several Republicans also weaponized Mamdani's immigration status and threatened denaturalization. In a June 27 tweet, Republican U.S. Representative from Tennessee Andy Ogles appealed to Attorney General Pam Bondi to denaturalize and deport Mamdani, calling him "little muhammad [sic]" and "antisemitic, socialist, communist". CAIR condemned Ogles's use of "little muhammad" as Islamophobic and racist. On July 1, Trump suggested without evidence that Mamdani might be in the U.S. illegally, adding that his administration would look into that question. Trump threatened to arrest Mamdani and withhold funding from New York City if he refused to comply with Trump's mass deportations. Trump also suggested a federal takeover of New York City if Mamdani is elected.
During an interview on The Brian Lehrer Show, New York Democratic U.S. Senator Kirsten Gillibrand claimed that Mamdani supports violence against Jewish people based on "past positions, particularly references to global jihad". These comments and positions could not be substantiated, and were in many cases contradicted by Mamdani's own statements condemning extremism. Her office later said she "misspoke" and she apologized to Mamdani. New York City-area U.S. Representatives Tom Suozzi, Laura Gillen, and Dan Goldman, as well as California U.S. Representative Eric Swalwell, all criticized Mamdani for past remarks about the phrase "globalize the intifada".
Like Republicans, Democratic figures attacked Mamdani with references to 9/11. Actress and activist Debra Messing, who is a member of the Democratic Party, claimed that Mamdani "celebrates 9/11" and she did not want "a mayor who sides with terrorists". She also connected him with Hamas and the October 7 attacks. A leaked mailer proposal on behalf of Cuomo's donors received backlash for digitally altering a picture of Mamdani to resemble a stereotype of Muslim terrorists. On October 23, while on the WABC radio show Sid and Friends in the Morning, Cuomo asked "God forbid, another 9/11—can you imagine Mamdani in the seat?" Sid Rosenberg replied "He'd be cheering", to which Cuomo laughed and stated "That's another problem". Mamdani condemned the comments as "disgusting".


==== Allegations of homophobia ====
Both Mamdani and Cuomo's respective records of LGBT rights came under scrutiny. During the primary, several LGBT clubs and organizations reported that Cuomo was ignoring them, including refusing to partake in interviews and questionnaires and skipping mayoral forums by various LGBT clubs and organizations. Several organizations and clubs also accused him of simultaneously "inflating his advocacy" on LGBT rights.
During the campaign, Cuomo repeatedly alleged that Mamdani was homophobic due to his dual citizenship in Uganda, a country with a hostile anti-LGBT record. Cuomo repeated the claims in October after Mamdani was seen in a recently-taken photo with Ugandan First Deputy Prime Minister Rebecca Kadaga, who pushed for legislation that legalized the death penalty for LGBT Ugandans in 2023. Mamdani responded, "Had I known that she was the architect of this horrific legislation and attack on queer Ugandans, I would not have taken it." Mamdani affirmed his support for LGBT New Yorkers throughout his mayoral campaign, including promises to establish New York as an LGBTQ+ sanctuary city, as well as expanding support for the LGBTQ+ community.
Cuomo was criticized by Mamdani for his father's distribution of homophobic campaign posters against Ed Koch – a closeted gay man – in the 1977 mayoral election; Cuomo denied any connection to the signs. Cuomo was described as a "close advisor" to his father's 1977 campaign.


== Endorsements ==


== Polling ==


=== Aggregate polls ===


=== General election polls ===


== Debates ==
During the general election campaign, two mayoral debates were organised by the New York City Campaign Finance Board and NYC Votes, working with local broadcasters WNBC and NY1. Mamdani, Silwa and Cuomo all met the requirements for participation in the debates.


== Results ==

Unlike the primary elections, which used ranked-choice-voting, the general election used first-past-the-post voting. The Associated Press called the race for Mamdani at 9:34 p.m. EST.
Approximately two million votes were cast, including 735,317 early votes, marking the highest turnout since 1969. Mamdani received over a million votes, becoming the first candidate to do so since John Lindsay in 1969. Mamdani won Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, and the Bronx, while Staten Island, which voted for Curtis Sliwa in the 2021 mayoral election, flipped to Cuomo. Mamdani won 61% of mostly Black residents and 57% of mostly Hispanic residents, while Cuomo won 52% of mostly White residents. Compared to the 2024 election, Mamdani tended to do well in precincts won by Kamala Harris, while Cuomo did well in precincts won by Trump. Mamdani received the majority of votes from lower- and middle-income residents by 51%, respectively. Mamdani did better among voters with college degrees according to a CNN exit poll, winning 57% of voters with a college degree, compared to 47% of voters without a college degree.
Jewish voters preferred Cuomo by a nearly two-to-one margin: 63% voted for Cuomo, 33% for Mamdani, and 3% for Sliwa. Cuomo won nearly 80% of the vote in precincts with heavy Orthodox Jewish populations. According to The Wall Street Journal, Mamdani received 78% of voters aged 18–29, and 66% of voters aged 30–44, while Cuomo received 47% of voters aged 45–64 and 56% of voters aged 65+, including those that viewed themselves as moderates or conservatives. According to an NBC News poll, Mamdani won 81% of voters who had lived in New York City for less than 10 years, 55% of those who had lived there for over 10 years but were not born in the city, and 39% of voters born in the city. A CBS News poll also showed that Mamdani received 66% of first-time voters. According to CNN exit poll of more than 4,000 people, Mamdani had performed strongly among younger women, winning 84% of women aged 18–29 and 65% of women aged 30–45.


=== By borough ===

Mamdani won four boroughs out of five, securing Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan, and the Bronx, while Cuomo carried Staten Island. This marked the first time a Republican did not prevail in the borough since 1985; however, it was still where Sliwa recorded his strongest performance, at 21.2% of the vote. The borough was also the only one where he came close to the second place, at 2,921 votes away from Mamdani. In contrast, Mamdani recorded his best result in Brooklyn, securing 57.1% of the vote. In comparison to the Democratic primary, Cuomo improved in Republican-heavy areas in Brooklyn, Queens, and Staten Island, while Mamdani gained ground in places with stronger Democratic support, including the Bronx, which he flipped away from Cuomo.
Both Mamdani and Cuomo earned the most votes in Brooklyn, at 36.3% and 28.9% of their total performance, respectively, mirroring the borough's status as the most populous one in the city. Conversely, Sliwa won the most votes in Queens, where he also secured the most votes in 2021.


=== By congressional district ===


== Aftermath ==
Cuomo conceded the election in a speech to his supporters, noting that he won a higher vote share on an independent line than his father Mario Cuomo did for the Liberal Party of New York in the 1977 New York City mayoral election. He called for unity with Mamdani supporters, saying "we will all help any way we can, because we need our New York City government to work." Cuomo did not call Mamdani to concede the election. Political commentators considered the election loss to be the end of Cuomo's political career.
Sliwa conceded defeat at 9:24 pm while addressing voters at an Italian restaurant on the Upper West Side. Declining to mention Mamdani by name in his concession speech, Sliwa warned the mayor-elect: "If you try to implement socialism, if you try to render our police weak and impotent, if you forsake the people's public safety, we're not only organizing, but we are mobilizing." Several minutes after conceding defeat, Sliwa called Mamdani to congratulate him on his victory.
Mamdani addressed his supporters around 11:30 pm. In a celebratory speech that opened with a quote by American socialist Eugene V. Debs, Mamdani repudiated the centrist politics of the Democratic establishment. He said of himself and of the Democratic Party:

I am young, despite my best efforts to grow older. I am Muslim. I am a democratic socialist. And most damning of all, I refuse to apologize for any of this. And yet, if tonight teaches us anything, it is that convention has held us back. We have bowed at the altar of caution, and we have paid a mighty price. Too many working people cannot recognize themselves in our party, and too many among us have turned to the right for answers to why they've been left behind. We will leave mediocrity in our past. No longer will we have to open a history book for proof that Democrats can dare to be great.
Mamdani quoted Jawaharlal Nehru and invoked the legacy of Fiorello La Guardia. He said of Cuomo, "let tonight be the final time I utter his name". The Times called the speech "notably short on conciliatory language". Mamdani's speechwriter, Julian Gerson, told CNN the defiant tone of the speech was quite intentional, and that civility was not warranted when speaking to politicians such as Andrew Cuomo and Donald Trump by virtue of their uncivil treatment of the electorate. The day after the election, Mamdani said he considered the electorate to have handed him a mandate to implement his agenda, including taxing the rich.
Mamdani's victory reverberated nationally and internationally. London mayor Sadiq Khan assessed that "New Yorkers faced a clear choice—between hope and fear—and just like we've seen in London hope won". Leaders on the British left such as Zack Polanski and Jeremy Corbyn hoped that Mamdani's victory might augur a resurgence of democratic socialism in Britain.
Many Democrats congratulated Mamdani for his win, with notable exceptions including the incumbent mayor Eric Adams. U.S. Senator from New York Chuck Schumer, who had pointedly declined to endorse Mamdani's candidacy or say who he voted for, rebuffed the view that he was out of touch with the Democratic Party. Republicans viewed Mamdani's win alongside other losses in the 2025 United States elections as bad news for their own party, or as a harbinger of New York City's descent into communism.
On the morning of November 5, the local chapters of major Jewish organizations including UJA-Federation of New York, Jewish Community Relations Council of New York, the Anti-Defamation League of New York/New Jersey, American Jewish Committee (AJC) of New York, and New York Board of Rabbis issued a joint statement that they "cannot ignore that the mayor-elect holds core beliefs fundamentally at odds with our community's deepest convictions and most cherished values." AJC CEO Ted Deutch vowed to hold Mamdani to account. Rabbi Josh Joseph of the Orthodox Union, the largest umbrella organization for Orthodox Jews in America, called for Mamdani to "ensur[e] that safety, dignity, and respect are guaranteed to every New Yorker, including Jewish New Yorkers." The Nexus Project called the ADL "divisive, hyperbolic and aggressive" for planning to monitor Mamdani's administration for antisemitism. Many politicians in Israel condemned Mamdani's victory.
The CEO of JPMorgan Chase, Jamie Dimon, stated that he would help and work with Mamdani if asked; however, other CEOs had differing views. Mike Duggan, the outgoing mayor of Detroit, stated he saw many New Yorkers showing that they wanted change on election day, and saw Mamdani as a chance to deliver it. Governors and mayors in states like New Hampshire, Tennessee, or Florida have boosted the idea of businesses in New York City relocating to their states. President Trump told businesses in New York that Miami is a refuge if those businesses were considering to relocate. Conversely, Texas governor Greg Abbott said he would impose a 100% tariff on New Yorkers moving to Texas following the election, despite states not having the ability to issue tariffs, and despite tariffs being conceptually inapplicable to people. He later said he was joking.


== See also ==
2025 New York City ballot proposals
2025 New York City borough president elections
2025 New York City Comptroller election
2025 New York City Council election
2025 New York City Public Advocate election
2025 United States local elections
History of the socialist movement in the United States
List of mayors of New York City
Politics of New York City
Red-baiting


== Notes ==

Partisan clients


== References ==


== External links ==
Official campaign websites
Eric Adams (I) for NYC Mayor
Andrew Cuomo (I) for NYC Mayor
Joseph Hernandez (I) for NYC Mayor
Abbey Laurel-Smith (I) for NYC Mayor
Zohran Mamdani (D) for NYC Mayor
Montell Moseley (WI-I) for NYC Mayor
Curtis Sliwa (R) for NYC Mayor
Karen Stachel (WI-I) for NYC Mayor
Jim Walden (I) for NYC Mayor