Do-Hum-Me (c. 1825–1843) was the daughter of the chief of the Sauk Native American tribe. According to her gravestone, her father's name was Nan-Nouce-Push-Ee-Toe. Some sources state that her mother died when Do-Hum-Me was seven years old, and Nan-Nouce-Push-Ee-Toe raised her with great love and affection.
In 1843, she accompanied her father in a trip to Princeton, New Jersey for treaty negotiations. While there, she met and fell in love with a young member of the Iowa tribe  named Cow-Hick-Kee. They married in Philadelphia, and soon thereafter were employed by P. T. Barnum's American Museum in Manhattan, performing ceremonial Native American dances.
A contemporary writer, Lydia Maria Child, wrote about Do-Hum-Me at length, and described Do-Hum-Me as "a very handsome woman, with a great deal of heart and happiness in her countenance". Many authors wrote about her, and many referred to what may have been part of her stage name - "The Productive Pumpkin". 
Do-Hum-Me was instantly very popular, not merely for her performances, but also because onlookers were delighted by the devotion and open, loving tenderness between her and her young husband.  Unfortunately, within a mere four to six weeks of their marriage, Do-Hum-Me died, aged only 18, likely due to a communicable illness, such as influenza. Lydia Maria Child blamed the death upon such factors as "sleeping by hot anthracite fires", followed by exposure to cold, wintry air, and then having to perform in poorly-ventilated, crowded indoor venues such as saloons and theatres. Child noted that such conditions - and illnesses - tended to impact Indigenous people more severely than white people. Indeed, many of Do-Hum-Me's compatriots became ill at the same time she died, and a number of them also died.  
Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn donated a burial plot, and she was interred by her father and husband, with many observers remarking upon their obvious grief.  The poet Walt Whitman wrote about her grave. Her grave monument featured a bas relief of the figure of a weeping Indigenous warrior, carved by the sculptor Robert E. Launitz, and was "one of the earliest carved statues for an American cemetery". Her grave became the most well-known and most frequently-visited in the cemetery.  Another poet, Carlos D. Stuart, wrote a poem about her, entitled Dohummee. 
In 2005 her monument was restored with the effort of Isaac Feliciano, whose wife Rosa perished in the 9/11 attacks at the World Trade Center.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Forgotten Tour 29 -- Green-Wood Cemetery, Part 2: "Do-Hum-Me"". Forgotten NY. 2007. Retrieved 2008-03-07.