André-Jacques Garnerin (French: [ɑ̃dʁeʒak ɡaʁn(ə)ʁɛ̃]; 31 January 1769 – 18 August 1823) was a French balloonist and the inventor of the frameless parachute. He was appointed Official Aeronaut of France.


== Biography ==
André-Jacques Garnerin was born in Paris. During the first phase of the French Revolutionary Wars (1792–1797), he was captured by British troops. Subsequently, he was turned over to the Austrians and held as a prisoner of war in Buda, Hungary, for three years.


== Balloons and parachutes ==


=== Ballooning ===

André-Jacques Garnerin was a student of the ballooning pioneer Professor Jacques Charles. Garnerin was heavily involved in the flight of hot air balloons, and worked with his older brother, Jean-Baptiste-Olivier Garnerin (1766–1849) in most of his ballooning activities. His significant contributions to ballooning and his expertise led to his appointment as the Official Aeronaut of France.
Garnerin began experiments with early parachutes based on umbrella-shaped devices and carried out the first frameless parachute descent (in the gondola) with a silk parachute on 22 October 1797 at Parc Monceau, Paris (1st Brumaire, Year VI of the Republican calendar). Garnerin's first parachute was made of white canvas with a diameter of approximately 23 feet (7 m). The umbrella was closed before he ascended, with a pole running down its centre and a rope running through a tube in the pole, which connected it to the balloon. 
Garnerin rode in a basket attached to the bottom of the parachute; at a height of approximately 3,000 feet (1,000 m) he severed the rope that connected his parachute to the balloon. The balloon continued skyward while Garnerin, with his basket and parachute, fell. The basket swung violently during descent, then bumped and scraped when it landed, but Garnerin emerged uninjured.

Garnerin went on to stage regular tests and demonstration of his parachute at Parc Monceau, Paris. On 22 October 1797, his parachute descent became a cause célèbre, particularly when he announced in 1798 that his next flight would include a woman as a passenger. Although the public and press were in favour, Garnerin was forced to justify his project before the officials of the Central Bureau of Police. 
They were concerned about the effect that reduced air pressure might have on the organs of the delicate female body and loss of consciousness, plus the moral implications of flying in such close proximity. Unsatisfied with Garnerin's responses, the police issued an injunction against him, forbidding the ascent on the grounds that the young woman was committing herself to the venture without fully understanding the possible outcomes. 
After further consultation with both the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Police the injunction was overturned on the grounds that "there was no more scandal in seeing two people of different gender ascend in a balloon than it is to see them jump into a carriage." They also agreed that the decision of the woman showed proof of her confidence in the experiment and a degree of personal intrepidity.
Citoyenne Henri had already been chosen, so when the ban was lifted Garnerin was ready to proceed. He advertised the ascent in L'Ami des Lois (a Parisian newspaper published from 1795 to 1798) :

The young Citoyenne who will accompany me is delighted to see the day approach for the journey. I shall ascend with her from the Parc Monceau, some time during the next ten days.
On 8 July 1798 a large number of spectators gathered in the Parc Monceau to witness the ascent. By all accounts Citoyenne Henri was young and beautiful, and she and Garnerin took several turns around the park to the applause of the crowd before she was assisted into the basket of the balloon by the astronomer Jérôme Lalande. The balloon trip passed without incident and the journey ended at Goussainville about 30 kilometres (19 mi) to the north of Paris.


== Touring England ==
Garnerin held the position of Official Aeronaut of France, and with his wife Jeanne Geneviève he visited England in 1802 during the Peace of Amiens and completed two demonstration flights. The first was on 5 July 1802 when, accompanied by the artist Edward Hawke Locker, he ascended from Lords Cricket Ground and travelled 17 miiles (27.4 km) to Chingford in just over 15 minutes. He carried with him a letter of introduction signed by the Prince Regent to give to anyone should he crash land.
His second flight took place on the evening of 21 September 1802, when he ascended in his hydrogen balloon from the Volunteer Ground in North Audley Street, Grosvenor Square and then made a parachute descent to a field near St Pancras. It was the first parachute descent ever made in England and was widely celebrated:

Bold Garnerin went up
Which increased his Repute
And came safe to earth
In his Grand Parachute.
During his stay in England, Garnerin also became embroiled in a lengthy and unpleasant war of words conducted in the English press concerning his activities during the French Revolution. He was variously accused of being involved in the trial of Marie Antoinette, the murder of the Princess de Lamballe and, during the time of the Terror, of being an agent of the infamous Committee of Public Safety. Needless to say, Garnerin denied the charges.
Upon the collapse of The Peace of Amiens, Garnerin returned to France. On a balloon flight on 3–4 October 1803, he covered a distance of 245 miles (395 km) between Paris and Clausen, Germany.


== Family ==
In most of his ballooning activities Garnerin worked with his older brother Jean-Baptiste-Olivier Garnerin (1766–1849).


=== Jeanne Garnerin ===
His student Jeanne Geneviève Labrosse, who later became his wife, first flew on 10 November 1798, one of the earliest women to fly in a balloon, and on 12 October 1799, she became the first woman to make a parachute descent, from an altitude of 900 meters.


=== Elisa Garnerin ===
His paternal niece Elisa Garnerin, (born 1791), learned to fly balloons at age 15 and made 39 professional parachute descents from 1815 to 1836 in Italy, Spain, Russia, Germany, and France.


== Death ==
On 18 August, 1823, at the age of 54, Garnerin was working on the construction of a new balloon. While walking around the construction site he was struck by a falling beam which killed him instantly.


== Legacy ==
Garnerin's first parachute jump was commemorated by Google in a Google Doodle on 22 October 2013.


== Notes ==


== References ==


=== Other sources ===
Walsh, William (1913). A Handy Book of Curious Information. London: Lippincott. pp. 942. Searchable at Internet Archive – A handy book of curious information by William Shepard Walsh
"World's First Parachute Jump made in 1797". George Galloway essay on Andre-Jacques Garnerin Archived 14 February 2004 at the Wayback Machine
M F Wright – profile of Andre Garnerin
From The Big Umbrella, by John Lucas, Drake Publishers Inc. Great Britain, 1973.
The Silken Angels, (early 1960s) [author unknown]
Parachuting, Dan Poynter


== External links ==

Brief biography and picture
Additional information on Garnerin
André-Jacques Garnerin biography and picture