Identity V (Chinese: 第五人格; pinyin: Dìwǔ réngé) is a 2018 free-to-play asymmetrical multiplayer survival horror game developed and published by the Chinese company NetEase in cooperation with Canadian studio Behaviour Interactive, creators of the similar game Dead by Daylight. Players take the role of the Hunter or a Survivor in a one-versus-four game; the Hunter must hunt and eliminate Survivors, typically through rocket chairs, while Survivors must evade the Hunter and collaborate to open the exit gates by decoding cipher machines.
It was initially released on April 2, 2018, by NetEase in China and later globally released on July 5, 2018, for iOS users and July 11, 2018, for Android clients. It is currently available on the App Store, Google Play Store, and Windows systems.


== Gameplay ==


=== Basic gameplay ===
Five players are divided into two factions: one player acts as the Hunter, while the other four act as Survivors with different roles in the match. The objective of the Hunter is to eliminate all the survivors before they can escape by chasing and placing them on Rocket Chairs. Meanwhile, the Survivors aim to escape through two exit gates after having decoded five Cipher Machines, or through the dungeon if there is only one Survivor left with at least two Cipher Machines decoded.
The Hunter wins the match by eliminating at least three Survivors, while the Survivors win if three or more escape from the exit gate; otherwise, if 2 survivors escape and the other two die, the game ends in a tie. The Survivors can rescue their teammates from the Rocket Chairs before the elimination process ends. Once eliminated, Survivors can spectate their teammates in-game. Rewards vary based on the game mode and the players' performance.
There are various characters to choose from, each having their unique abilities. Hunters also possess "Secondary Skills", talents that may aid the Hunter during the match, while Survivors may use the terrains of the map to their advantage.
The game features 4 types of in-game currencies not affiliated with its core gameplay: Clues, Fragments, Inspirations, and Echoes. Clues are obtained by partaking in matches and used to unlock new characters and purchase decorative items. Fragments are used to purchase cosmetic items, i.e., character skins and effect accessories. Inspirations are used for the game's character skin gacha system, and Echoes are obtained through spending real-life money and can purchase most items directly.


=== Persona ===
"Intrinsic Persona Web", also known as Persona, gives both factions extra talents during matches. Different personas grant different conditional perks in combat, such as highlighting nearby allies for Survivors or shortening attack recovery time for Hunters. The maximum number of points allowed to be used is 130, which can be obtained permanently through participating in matches.


=== Ranked matches ===
Identity V features two different ranking systems in the form of Character Points and Tier Divisions. Both are used only in Ranked Matches, available at specific time slots during the day.
Character Points are earned by playing ranked matches with a specific character and are used to determine one's spot on the leaderboards. Character Points are specific to each character and may slowly decrease over time. Character Points will also be reset when a new Season arrives. Badges can be earned for a specific character depending on points earned.
Identity V also features eight Tiers split into subdivisions, which players can be sent up and down depending on their performance. Winning Ranked matches earns Rank Points, and losing loses Rank Points. Once a certain number of Rank Points is reached, the player can go up to the next subdivision if they gain Rank Points in their next ranked match. The tier bracket the player ends up in will determine what reward they get once the season ends. Similar to Character Points, Tier Divisions are reset when a new Season arrives.
Alongside normal Rank Matches, players can participate in Five Players ranking matches, available at specific time slots during weekends. The five players to play need to be teamed up before matching, and one must be a hunter. Five Players ranking mode uses a different set of Tiers and subdivisions but otherwise retains the same rules as normal Rank Matches. The win/loose depends on which team's survivor escaped the most.


=== Other game modes ===
Entertainment game modes, belonging to the Violent Struggle submenu, have their own rules and adjustments and commence on fixed hours during the day.

In Duo Hunters/Pack Hunter, two Hunters team up against eight Survivors. Survivors gain an extra hit point; this game mode features telephone booths from which characters of both factions can directly purchase items with acquired game points to further strengthen their abilities.
The Blackjack mode plays in the style of the card game Blackjack, with a different player becoming a Hunter in each round.
In Tarot, a team of three Survivors (two Squires and a King) and one Hunter (playing as their team's Knight) face off against another team of the same composition, aiming to eliminate the opposing King before their rivals do. A special version, called Crystal Ball Tarot, gives certain characters temporary buffs by activating crystal balls.
A fourth mode added in 2021, known as Chasing Shadows, features six Survivors who have to race against each other on an obstacle course. Survivors can team up into three teams of two to participate in the game mode.
A fifth mode added in August 2022, called Frenzy Rhapsody, features six Survivors split into two teams and incorporates dodgeball elements into gameplay.
A sixth mode was announced in August 2023, called Hide and Seek. The actual gameplay resembles prop-hunting, where two Hunters must find and eliminate six Survivors disguised as objects within 5 minutes.
A seventh gamemode, Copycat, features a battle of wits between 10 players split into 3 factions: Detectives, Copycats, and Mystery Guests, each having their own winning conditions. The gamemode takes great inspiration from social deduction games, such as Mafia and Among Us.
An eighth mode added in November 2024, called Final Blowout, primarily features the same elements of a standard ranked match, where survivors and hunters may ban characters. Players can also draw cards which gives them special powers such as faster decoding for the survivors, and faster attack recovery for the hunters.


== Setting ==


=== Story Mode ===
The player initially assumes the role of Orpheus, an amnesiac detective who, in the case of a missing memory, arrives at the Oletus Manor, the main setting of the game. The Oletus Manor is a large manor owned by a mysterious individual that holds "games" of the Hunter and the Hunted. Throughout the duration of his stay, Orpheus collects evidence from written records, or "diaries", allowing him to visualize "games" from a participant's perspective.
On October 28, 2021, NetEase released a major expansion pack called "Time of Reunion" that expanded the storyline, particularly Orpheus's past and his involvement in the manor games. On April 20, 2023, NetEase released Update 2.0, "Ashes of Memory", which changes the main character to Alice DeRoss, a journalist whose investigations lead her to the Oletus Manor.


== Crossovers ==
The game has had many crossover events.
Identity V has collaborated with video game franchises Danganronpa and Persona, the film Edward Scissorhands, and the manga/anime series The Promised Neverland, Death Note, Junji Ito's Tomie, Mitsuji Kamata, Bungo Stray Dogs, Case Closed, and Frieren: Beyond Journey's End. There have been many crossovers exclusive to the game's Chinese servers, such as with Crazy Alien, McDonald's, Fei Ren Zai, and KFC.
From June to July 2022, Identity V featured a crossover event with the Chinese television series Link Click. Identity V has also collaborated with the game Project Zero II, lasting from November to December 2023. From February to March 2025, Identity V collaborated with the Arthur Conan Doyle Estate. 


== See also ==

Dead by Daylight
Evil Dead: The Game
Friday the 13th: The Game
List of horror video games
Predator: Hunting Grounds
Propnight
The Texas Chain Saw Massacre


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website (English)