In-Q-Tel (IQT), formerly Peleus and In-Q-It, is an American not-for-profit venture capital firm based in Arlington, Virginia. It invests in companies to keep the Central Intelligence Agency, and other intelligence agencies, equipped with the latest in information technology in support of United States intelligence capability. The name "In-Q-Tel" is an intentional reference to Q, the fictional inventor who supplies technology to James Bond.


== History ==
 

Originally named Peleus and known as In-Q-It, In-Q-Tel was "the brainchild" of former Director of Central Intelligence George Tenet. Gilman Louie was In-Q-Tel's first CEO and Norm Augustine, a former CEO of Lockheed Martin, led the board of directors. In-Q-Tel's mission is to identify and invest in companies developing cutting-edge technologies that serve United States national security interests. Congress approved funding for In-Q-Tel, which was increased in later years. Origins of the corporation can also be traced to Ruth A. David, who headed the Central Intelligence Agency's Directorate of Science & Technology in the 1990s and promoted the importance of rapidly advancing information technology for the CIA. 
In-Q-Tel now engages with entrepreneurs, growth companies, researchers, and venture capitalists to deliver technologies that provide superior capabilities for the CIA, DIA, NGA, and the wider intelligence community. In-Q-Tel concentrates on three broad commercial technology areas: software, infrastructure and materials sciences.
Former CIA director George Tenet said,

We [the CIA] decided to use our limited dollars to leverage technology developed elsewhere. In 1999 we chartered ... In-Q-Tel. ... While we pay the bills, In-Q-Tel is independent of CIA. CIA identifies pressing problems, and In-Q-Tel provides the technology to address them. The In-Q-Tel alliance has put the Agency back at the leading edge of technology ... This ... collaboration ... enabled CIA to take advantage of the technology that Las Vegas uses to identify corrupt card players and apply it to link analysis for terrorists [cf. the parallel data-mining effort by the SOCOM-DIA operation Able Danger], and to adapt the technology that online booksellers use and convert it to scour millions of pages of documents looking for unexpected results.

In-Q-Tel sold 5,636 shares of Google, worth over US$2.2 million, on November 15, 2005. The share transfer was a result of Google's acquisition of Keyhole, Inc, the CIA-funded satellite mapping software now known as Google Earth.
In August 2006, In-Q-Tel reviewed more than 5,800 business plans and invested approximately $150M in more than 90 companies.
As of 2016, In-Q-Tel listed 325 investments, but more than 100 were secret, according to the Washington Post.


== Governance ==
In-Q-Tel is a Virginia-registered corporation, legally independent of the CIA or any other government agency. The corporation is bound by its Charter agreement and annual contract with the CIA, which set out the relationship between the two organizations. In-Q-Tel's mission (to support the Intelligence Community's technical needs) is promoted by the In-Q-Tel Interface Center (QIC), an office within the CIA that facilitates communication and relationships between In-Q-Tel and government intelligence organizations. While In-Q-Tel is a nonprofit corporation, it differs from IARPA and other models in that its employees and trustees can profit from its investments. A Wall Street Journal investigation found that in 2016, nearly half of In-Q-Tel's trustees had a financial connection with a company the corporation had funded. 
In-Q-Tel's current president and CEO is Steve Bowsher.
Original members of the board include Lee A. Ault, III, Norman R. Augustine, John Seely Brown, Stephen Friedman, Paul G. Kaminski, Jeong H. Kim, Alex J. Mandl, John N. McMahon, and William J. Perry.
The chairman of the board is Michael M. Crow.


== Investments ==

The company lists the majority of its investments on its website page.
In-Q-Tel functions partially in public; however, what products it has and how they are used is strictly secret. According to The Washington Post, "virtually any U.S. entrepreneur, inventor or research scientist working on ways to analyze data has probably received a phone call from In-Q-Tel or at least been Googled by its staff of technology-watchers."


=== Software ===
ArcSight – secure software
Attensity – search engine
Basis Technology – multilingual text analytics and cyber forensics
CallMiner – Phone speech analytics software
Connectify – Wifi & VPN
Convera RetrievalWare – search engine
Destineer – games FPS training simulation
Digital Reasoning – Synthesys v3.0 – review facts and associations at a glance
Endeca – search data repositories
FireEye – malware protection
Forterra – virtual worlds for training
Huddle – cloud-based content collaboration software
Inktomi Corp – network infrastructure software
InnoCentive – crowdsourcing websites
Inxight – search engine
Keyhole, Inc – Geospatial visualization application (Acquired by Google in 2004 and would go on to become Google Earth in 2005)
Language Weaver – automatic language translation
Lingotek – translation services
MemSQL – Distributed, in-memory, SQL database management system for real-time analytics
MetaCarta – search engine
Palantir Technologies – data integration, search and discovery, knowledge management, and secure collaboration
Platfora – big data analytics and visualization
Recorded Future – web intelligence and predictive analytics
SRA OrionMagic – cms software
Socrata – Open Data Solutions for Government Innovation
Spotfire – visualization data analytics
Tacit Knowledge Systems – internal software
Teradici Corporation – desktop virtualization
TerraGo – location intelligence applications and software GeoPDF
Traction Software – web 2.0
Visual Sciences – real-time visual analysis
Wickr - Encrypted messaging application
zSpace (company) – 3-Dimensional holographic imaging displays


=== Infrastructure ===
Hardware
Xanadu Quantum Technologies – photonic quantum computers
Tyfone – digital security for mobility, cloud, and IoT
Stoke Space – reusable rocket
Data centers
Bay Microsystems – packet processing and data traffic
Systems Research and Development – real-time data warehousing
Network Appliance – Decru (networked data storage)
JetCool – liquid cooling for data centres
Bioscience
Colossal Biosciences


== Related personnel ==
Dan Geer (2008–present) Chief Information Security Officer
Michael D. Griffin – former president; later administrator of NASA.
Norman R. Augustine
Gilman Louie – former CEO
Paul G. Kaminski – former director
Amit Yoran – former CEO
John Seely Brown
Stephen Friedman
William J. Perry
Alex J. Mandl
Rebecca Bace
Luciana Borio
Peter Barris
Anita K. Jones
Jami Miscik
Jeong H. Kim


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website