Infinity Sports Network is an American sports radio network. It debuted as CBS Sports Radio with hourly sports news updates on September 4, 2012, and with 24/7 programming on January 2, 2013. 
Infinity Sports Network is programmed by Audacy, Inc. and distributed by Westwood One. Programming on the network featured reporters and personalities from CBS Sports, CBS Sports Network, and CBSSports.com. Infinity Sports Network is broadcast throughout the United States on radio affiliates and streamed online.


== History ==
From launch until November 17, 2017, it was operated by CBS Radio until its merger with Entercom. Entercom, which later became Audacy, Inc., continued to manage the network under a licensing agreement with CBS. The rights to the CBS logo, but not the name, expired at the end of 2019; the rights to the CBS cross-branding—which had originally been scheduled to expire at the end of 2020, ended on April 15, 2024. At this time, the network rebranded as Infinity Sports Network; the name is a nod to Infinity Broadcasting Corporation, a corporate predecessor to CBS Radio. 
On October 21, 2025, it was announced that the network would rebrand as Westwood One Sports on December 29, 2025; the rebranding will see Westwood One take a more active role in programming the network.


== Stations ==
Infinity Sports Network airs on more than 300 stations nationwide. The nominal flagship station of Infinity Sports Network is WFAN / WFAN-FM in New York City (although WFAN-AM-FM only carry some brief reports and occasional weekend shows from the network).  Since WFAS shifted to conservative talk in 2021 (and went silent in 2024), New York City has had no full-time Infinity Sports Network affiliate station, although the network is heard around the clock on an HD Radio digital subchannel of WFAN-FM.  WFAS, along with WHLD in Niagara Falls–Buffalo, were among numerous Cumulus Media stations that had been part of the network's core affiliates but flipped to conservative talk.
Audacy also distanced itself from the network when it shifted focus to its own in-house BetQL Network, which features discussions of gambling, in 2021.  The BetQL stations continue to carry some Infinity Sports Network programs, including The Jim Rome Show and its late night programming.
Other affiliate stations include:


== Programming ==

Weekend broadcasters can and do vary regularly


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to CBS Sports Radio at Wikimedia Commons
Infinity Sports Network official site