Kara Anne Swisher ( KAIR-ə; born December 11, 1962) is an American journalist. She has covered the business of the internet since 1994. As of 2023, Swisher was a contributing editor at New York Magazine, the host of the podcast On with Kara Swisher, and the co-host of the podcast Pivot.
In 2014, she co-founded Vox Media's Recode with Walt Mossberg. From 2018 to 2022, she was an opinion writer for The New York Times, before re-joining Vox Media. She has also written for The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post, co-produced the All Things Digital conference, and the online publication All Things D.


== Early life and education ==
Swisher lived in Roslyn Harbor, Long Island, New York, until her father died when she was five years old. Her family moved to Princeton, New Jersey, and she grew up there. In a 2021 interview with Bryan Elliott for Inc.'s Behind The Brand, Swisher said that as a child, she always wanted to work either in the military, with military intelligence, or with the CIA. 
Swisher attended the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service (SFS) at Georgetown University in Washington D.C. At Georgetown, she wrote for The Hoya, Georgetown's  school newspaper and then for the school's news magazine, The Georgetown Voice. During her sophomore and junior years, she interned at The Washington Post which solidified her career in journalism. She obtained her undergraduate degree in 1984. In 1985, she graduated from Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism with a MS in journalism. She "spent some time" at Duke University studying misinformation and propaganda, which Swisher said were "always my area of study".
After the fall of the Berlin Wall, Swisher received a fellowship allowing her to live almost a year in Kreuzberg in Berlin, Germany. Preparing for future employment within  "the security apparatus", she attempted to learn German but never mastered the language. Then Swisher worked at the Washington City Paper in Washington, D.C. She returned to The Washington Post in 1986 as a news aid for the Style desk before becoming a reporter covering the local retail beat.


== Career ==


=== The Washington Post ===
Swisher credits the Post as where she "significantly started to use technology". She used to drag a suitcase cell phone around the office. She received national attention for covering AOL and the beginning of the dot-com era in the 1990s. While working for the business section of the paper, Swisher decided to leave to devote time to writing AOL.com: How Steve Case Beat Bill Gates, Nailed the Netheads, and Made Millions in the War for the Web. It was during this time that she first met Walt Mossberg, a veteran tech journalist who would become a close friend and co-owner of the AllThingsD blog.


=== The Wall Street Journal ===
Swisher joined The Wall Street Journal in 1997, working from its bureau in San Francisco. She created and wrote Boom Town, a column devoted to the companies, personalities and culture of Silicon Valley which appeared on the front page of the Wall Street Journal's Marketplace section and online. During that time, she was cited as being the most influential reporter covering the internet by Industry Standard magazine.
In 2003, with her colleague Walt Mossberg, she launched the All Things Digital conference and later expanded it into a daily blog called AllThingsD.com. The conference featured interviews by Swisher and Mossberg of top technology executives including Bill Gates, Steve Jobs and Larry Ellison.


=== Books ===
 
She is the author of aol.com: How Steve Case Beat Bill Gates, Nailed the Netheads and Made Millions in the War for the Web, published by Times Business Print Books in July 1998. The sequel, There Must Be a Pony in Here Somewhere: The AOL Time Warner Debacle and the Quest for a Digital Future, was published in the fall of 2003 by Crown Business Print Books. In 2021, it was announced that she signed a two-book memoir deal with Simon & Schuster. The first, Burn Book: A Tech Love Story, was released in February 2024.


=== Recode ===
On January 1, 2014, Swisher and Mossberg struck out on their own with the Recode website, based in San Francisco. In the spring of 2014 they held the inaugural Code Conference near Los Angeles. Vox Media acquired the website in May 2015. A month later in June 2015, they launched Recode Decode, a weekly podcast in which Swisher interviews prominent figures in the technology space with Stewart Butterfield featured as the first guest.
In September 2018, Recode and Vox Media launched Pivot, a semi-weekly news commentary podcast co-hosted by Swisher and Scott Galloway. In April 2020, New York Magazine announced Pivot would be joining the magazine's properties, dropping the Recode branding, and Swisher would also join as editor-at-large. In May 2020, Swisher wrote on Twitter that she had not been involved in editing or assigning stories on Recode for many years.


=== The New York Times ===
Swisher became a contributing writer to the New York Times' Opinion section in August 2018, focusing on tech. She has written about topics like Elon Musk, Kevin Systrom's departure from Instagram, Google and censorship, and an internet Bill of Rights.
In September 2020, the Times premiered Sway, a semiweekly podcast hosted by Swisher focused on the subject of power and those who wield it, with Nancy Pelosi, then Speaker of the United States House of Representatives featured as her first guest. Other guests have included Georgia politician and voting rights activist Stacey Abrams, Airbnb CEO Brian Chesky, actor Sacha Baron Cohen, Apple CEO Tim Cook, entrepreneur Mark Cuban, Microsoft co-founder and philanthropist Bill Gates, former Presidential candidate Senator Amy Klobuchar (D-MN), United States Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg, film director Spike Lee, Parler CEO John Matze, Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger, USSF CSO Gen. John W. Raymond, and social activist Monica Lewinsky.
In June 2022, Swisher announced that she would leave The New York Times to pursue a new project at New York magazine.


=== Vox Media ===

Swisher became an editor-at-large at New York Magazine and the host of On with Kara Swisher in September 2022. The first episode of 'On' premiered September 26.


=== Other activities ===
Swisher was a judge for Mayor Michael Bloomberg's NYC BigApps competition in New York. She told Rolling Stone writer Claire Hoffman: "A lot of these people I cover are babies", Swisher says. "I always call them papier-mâché–they just wilt."
Swisher appeared as herself in a 2015 episode of the HBO show Silicon Valley. 
Swisher wrote of her experiences working for The McLaughlin Group in a 2018 Slate article, in which she alleged that host John McLaughlin abused staff and sexually harassed women. Reflecting on his death from prostate cancer in 2016, she wrote, "I’m so glad he’s dead. Seriously, I’m glad he’s dead. He was a jackass. He deserved it."
In January 2019, Swisher told people who disapproved of a Gillette advertisement after the January 2019 Lincoln Memorial confrontation,  "... to all you aggrieved folks who thought this Gillette ad was too much bad-men-shaming, after we just saw it come to life with those awful kids and their fetid smirking harassing that elderly man on the Mall: Go __ yourselves." Citing Swisher's comment as an example of how inaccurate many media accounts of the story had been, Caitlin Flanagan of The Atlantic Monthly observed, "You know the left has really changed in this country when you find its denizens... lionizing the social attitudes of the corporate monolith Procter & Gamble." Swisher apologized in a tweet two days later.
In 2021 and 2023, Swisher hosted the official companion podcast for the third and fourth seasons of HBO's TV series Succession. In 2024, she received criticism for her book “Burn Book: A Tech Love Story," with critics saying that it was "anti-worker."
Plan to Run for Mayor of San Francisco

In 2016, she announced that she planned to run for mayor of San Francisco as a Democrat in 2023. She was seen as likely to run on a "highly progressive" platform with a focus on more housing, legalizing marijuana and new labor laws for the "on-demand" workforce that dominated (and still dominates) San Francisco. We all yammer about politicians and how bad things are, and I think it important that we stop bellyaching and act if we want change. Also this whole election cycle has struck a chord in me that I have always thought about, related to professional politicians and how we need to shift thinking about who should serve and the duty of citizens to be, you know, citizens. There is an important and necessary role for good government and I hate this wholesale tearing down of it. Also the increasing divide between tech sector and the city is something that I think a lot about. Not that I have solutions as yet.


== Personal life ==
Swisher married engineer and technology executive Megan Smith in Marin County in 1999 at a time when same-sex marriage was not legal in California. They had an additional legal wedding ceremony in 2003 in Niagara Falls, Canada, in 2004 as part of the San Francisco 2004 same-sex weddings, and another in San Francisco in November 2008 in advance of California Proposition 8, which declared same-sex marriages invalid in California. Swisher and Smith had two sons, Louis and Alexander. They separated in 2014, and were divorced as of 2017. Swisher married Amanda Katz on October 3, 2020, with whom she had two children.
In 2011, Swisher suffered a "mini-stroke" while on a flight to Hong Kong where she was soon hospitalized and put on anticoagulant medication. She wrote about the experience in a remembrance of Luke Perry, after a stroke led to his death in 2019.
Swisher is known for wearing dark aviator sunglasses even while indoors, explaining "I have light sensitivity a little; I just don’t like bright lights." She grew up Catholic and identifies as agnostic.


== Bibliography ==
aol.com: How Steve Case Beat Bill Gates, Nailed the Netheads, and Made Millions in the War for the Web. New York: Random House International, 1999. ISBN 9780812931914, OCLC 313499003
Kara Swisher and Lisa Dickey, There Must Be a Pony in Here Somewhere: The AOL Time Warner Debacle and the Quest for the Digital Future New York: Three Rivers Press, 2003. ISBN 9781400049646, OCLC 58726021
Burn Book: A Tech Love Story. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2024.  ISBN 9781982163891, OCLC 1393241009


== Awards ==
2011 Gerald Loeb Award for Blogging for "Liveblogging Yahoo Earnings Calls in 2010 (They're Funny!)"
2020 Fast Company Queer 50
2021 Fast Company Queer 50
2021 American Academy of Arts and Sciences Elected member


== References ==


== External links ==

Kara Swisher on Twitter
Appearances on C-SPAN