Leviathan: The Last Defense (絶対防衛レヴィアタン, Zettai Bōei Reviatan; lit. "Absolute Defense Leviathan") is a Japanese mobile game by GREE. The plot features anthropomorphized dragons as characters. It is a freemium game, as the base game is free of charge but game add-ons can be downloaded for various prices. The game was announced in October 2012 and users who preregistered got a rare card.
An anime adaptation by Gonzo aired in Japan from April to July 2013.


== Characters ==
Leviathan (レヴィアタン, Reviatan)
Voiced by: Saori Hayami (Japanese); Caitlynn French (English)
Leviathan is a water mage from the land of Aquafall who makes friends with Bahamut and Jörmungandr while searching for her older brother. She lives in a humble cottage by herself and can transform into a water-affinity dragon girl.
Bahamut (バハムート, Bahamūto)
Voiced by: Eri Kitamura (Japanese); Hilary Haag (English)
Bahamut is a fire mage and daughter of the city's leader. She lives in a huge mansion, along with her father and personal maids. She can transform into a fire-affinity dragon girl.
Jörmungandr (ヨルムンガンド, Yorumungando)
Voiced by: Ayana Taketatsu (Japanese); Brittney Karbowski (English)
Jörmungandr doesn't have any elemental magic abilities, but is by far the physically strongest girl of the trio, capable of lifting huge boulders by herself - likely through strength boosting magic and can transform into an earth-affinity dragon girl brandishing a huge axe. She was adopted along with her 3 younger sisters by a team of miners and they call each one of them their fathers.
Syrup (シロップ, Shiroppu)
Voiced by: Kana Hanazawa (Japanese); Monica Rial (English)
Syrup is a fairy who befriends the girls and usually tries to recruit them into the "Aquafall Defense Squad", that she intends to establish to fight back the Toripu. Despite being small, she has quite an appetite, capable of eating several times her own weight in one meal and is very honest, to the point of bluntness that usually gets her into trouble.
Yurlungur (ユルルングル, Yururunguru)
Yurlungur is a large dragon who appears in episode 3, and uses Syrup to translate what he is saying to the girls. He tells them he isn't feeling well. They help him by going inside of his body and defeating a giant Toripu that was making him feel ill. He then thanks the girls and tells them that they can call him anytime they are in trouble.


== Media ==


=== Anime ===
An anime series directed by Kenichi Yatani and produced by Gonzo, GREE, and Dentsu aired from April 6 to July 7, 2013. The series uses two pieces of theme music. The opening theme is "Hajimari no Resolution" (始まりのResolution) by Yuki Kanno while them ending theme is "Truly" by PASSPO☆. Crunchyroll streamed the series under the title Zettai Boei Leviatan, while was licensed for home video and digital distribution by Sentai Filmworks. After Sentai Filmworks lost the rights to the series, it was re-licensed by Funimation.


==== Episode list ====


== Reception ==
Carl Kimlinger of Anime News Network gave the series an overall C+ rating. He gave credit to both director Kenichi Yatani and the character designs of Takaharu Okuma for crafting a light-hearted adventure with an "intensely cute" female cast that delivers a "pleasing dry sense of humor" but found it throwaway with its ongoing story using "musty RPG plotting" and its overall charm being a detriment to itself, saying "That frothiness is both Leviathan's great strength and its ultimate weakness. It's effortlessly fun to watch, but also about as memorable as, well, something that I can't quite remember right now." Stig Høgset, writing for THEM Anime Reviews, heavily criticized the series for being a poor adaptation of a fantasy RPG game that puts an overreliance on moe designs and fanservice, while the overall plot and characters get little development to engage viewers, concluding that its "A failure in every single aspect of what makes a show good, and I've seen a lot of relatively average fantasy anime that at least managed to be entertaining."


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official game website (in Japanese)
Official anime website (in Japanese)
Leviathan: The Last Defense (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia