This is a list of famous and notable people from Madhya Pradesh, India. This would include persons who are known to a large number of people and is based on the extent of their popularity. Their fame could be brief, what matters is that they were well known during the peak of their popularity.

 


== Rulers and Generals ==


=== Ancient ===
Yashodharman, (Gupta script:  Ya-śo-dha-rmma, IAST: Yaśodharman) (r. 515 – 545) was a ruler of Malwa, in Central India, during the early part of the 6th century. He probably belonged to the Second Aulikara dynasty. He conquered much of the Indian subcontinent between c. 530-540 AD according to Mandsaur pillar inscription.
Devi (wife of Ashoka) was, according to the Sri Lankan chronicles, the first wife of the third Mauryan Emperor Ashoka The Great. She was also the mother of Ashoka's first two children—his son, Mahendra, and daughter, Sanghamitra—both of whom played important roles in the spread of Buddhism to other countries. She is also remembered for the Sanchi Stupa.


=== Medieval ===
Nagabhata I, (r. c. 730 – 760 CE) was the founder of the imperial Gurjara Pratihara dynasty in northern India. He ruled the Avanti (or Malava) region in present-day Madhya Pradesh, from his capital at Ujjain. He may have extended his control over Gurjaradesa, which includes parts of present-day Gujarat and Rajasthan.
Nagabhata II, (reign 795–833) was an Indian Emperor from Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty. He ascended the throne of Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty after his father Vatsraja.
Mihira Bhoja, (c. 836–885 CE) or Bhoja I was a Gurjara-Pratihara emperor. He succeeded his father, Ramabhadra. Bhoja was a devotee of Vishnu and adopted the title of Ādivarāha, which is inscribed on some of his coins.. One of the outstanding political figures of India in the ninth century, he ranks with Dhruva Dharavarsha and Dharmapala as a great general and empire builder.
Lakshmikarna, (IAST: Lakśmi-Karṇa, r. c. 1041–1073 CE), also known as Karna, was a ruler of the Kalachuri dynasty of Tripuri in central India. His kingdom was centered around the Chedi or Dahala region in present-day Madhya Pradesh.
Hammiravarman, (IAST: Hammīravarman, c. 1288–1311 CE) was a king of the Chandela dynasty of central India. He ruled in the Jejakabhukti region (Bundelkhand in present-day Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh). During his reign, the Delhi Sultan Alauddin Khalji conquered some parts of the Chandela kingdom.
Rahila, (IAST: Rāhila, reigned c. 885–905 CE) was a king of the Chandela dynasty of India. He ruled in the Jejakabhukti region (Bundelkhand in present-day Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh).
Yashovarman, (IAST: Yaśovarman; reigned c. 925–950 CE), also known as Lakshavarman, was a king of the Chandela dynasty of India. He ruled in the Jejakabhukti region (Bundelkhand in present-day Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh). He practically established the Chandelas as a sovereign power, although he formally acknowledged suzerainty of the Gurjara-Pratiharas. His major military achievement was the conquest of Kalanjara (modern Kalinjar). He is also notable for having commissioned the Lakshmana Temple at Khajuraho.
Dhanga, (r. c. 950–999 CE), also known as Dhaṇgadeva in inscriptions, was a king of the Chandela dynasty of India. He ruled in the Jejakabhukti region (Bundelkhand in present-day Madhya Pradesh). Dhanga established the sovereignty of the Chandelas, who had served as vassals to the Pratiharas until his reign. He is also notable for having commissioned magnificent temples at Khajuraho, including the Vishvanatha temple.
Vidyadhara, (r. c. 1003–1035 CE) was a Chandela king of central India. He ruled in the Jejakabhukti region (Bundelkhand in present-day Madhya Pradesh). Vidyadhara was the successor of Ganda, and expanded the Chandela power between Chambal river in the northwest and Narmada River in south.
Madanavarman, (reigned c. 1128–1165 CE) was a king of the Chandela dynasty of India. He succeeded his father Prithvi-Varman as the ruler of the Jejakabhukti region (Bundelkhand in present-day Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh). He revived the Chandela glory by subduing the neighbouring kingdoms, and commissioned several tanks and temples.
Bhoja, (reigned c. 1010–1055 CE) was an Indian king from the Paramara dynasty. His kingdom was centered around the Malwa region in central India, where his capital Dhara-nagara (modern Dhar) was located. Bhoja fought wars with nearly all his neighbours in attempts to extend his kingdom, with varying degrees of success. At its zenith, his empire extended from Chittor in the north to upper Konkan in the south, and from the Sabarmati River in the west to Vidisha in the east.
Devapala, (reigned c. 1218–1239 CE) was an Indian king from the Paramara dynasty, who ruled in the Malwa region of central India.
Mahalakadeva, (died 1305 CE), also known as Mahlak Deo or Mahlak Deva, was a king of the Paramara dynasty in central India. The last known ruler of the dynasty, he was defeated and killed by the forces of Alauddin Khalji of Delhi.


=== Modern Day ===
Vijaya Raje Scindia (12 October 1919 – 25 January 2001), born Lekha Divyeshwari Devi in Nepal and known popularly as the Rajmata of Gwalior in India, was a prominent Indian political personality. In the days of the British Raj, as consort of the last ruling Maharaja of Gwalior, Jivajirao Scindia, she ranked among the highest royal figures of the land. In later life, she became a politician of considerable influence and was elected repeatedly to both houses of the Indian parliament. She was one of the founding members of the Bharatiya Jana Sangh.


== Freedom fighters ==
Chandra Shekhar Azad, (; 23 July 1906 – 27 February 1931), popularly known as Chandra Shekhar Azad, was an Indian revolutionary who reorganised the Hindustan Republican Association (HRA) under its new name of Hindustan Socialist Republican Association (HSRA) after the death of its founder, Ram Prasad Bismil, and three other prominent party leaders, Roshan Singh, Rajendra Nath Lahiri and Ashfaqulla Khan. He hailed from Bardarka village in Unnao district of United Provinces and his parents were Sitaram Tiwari and Jagrani Devi. He often used the pseudonym "Balraj" while signing pamphlets issued as the commander-in-chief of the HSRA.
Ravishankar Shukla, (2 August 1877 — 31 December 1956) was a leader of the Indian National Congress, Indian independence movement activist, the Premier of the Central Provinces and Berar from 27 April 1946 to 25 January 1950, first Chief Minister of the reorganised Madhya Pradesh state from 1 November 1956 until his death on 31 December 1956, he was elected from Saraipali in Madhya Pradesh (now in Chhattisgarh). He also served as Member of Constituent Assembly of India from Central Provinces and Berar.
Tatya Tope
Rani Lakshmi Bai, born Manikarnika Tambe; 19 November 1828 — 18 June 1858), was the Maharani consort of the princely state of Jhansi in Maratha Empire from 1843 to 1853 by marriage to Maharaja Gangadhar Rao Newalkar. She was one of the leading figures in the Indian Rebellion of 1857, who became a national hero and symbol of resistance to the British rule in India for Indian nationalists.
Tantya Bheel (Tantya Mama), (or Tantya Bheel, Tantya Mama; 26 January 1842 – 4 December 1889) was a freedom fighter active in India between 1878 and 1889. He is described very negatively as a criminal in the British-era accounts, but is recognized by Indians as a heroic figure. Accounts of both eras have described him as an "Indian Robin Hood".
Jhalkari Bai
Rani Avanti Bai (16 August 1831 – 20 March 1858) was an Indian  queen-ruler and freedom fighter. She was the queen of the Ramgarh (present-day Dindori) in Madhya Pradesh. An opponent of the British East India Company during the Indian Rebellion of 1857, information concerning her is sparse and mostly comes from folklore. In 21st century, she has been used as an icon in Lodhi politics as she comes from Lodhi Rajput community.


== Military ==


=== Airforce ===
Air Chief Marshal  Shashindra Pal Tyagi, more commonly known as S P Tyagi, is an Indian Air Force officer who served as the 20th Chief of Air Staff of the Indian Air Force and served from 31 December 2004 to 31 March 2007. He was succeeded by Air Chief Marshal Fali Homi Major.
Squadron Leader Avani Chaturvedi (born 27 October 1993) is an Indian pilot from Rewa district, Madhya Pradesh. She was declared as the first female combat pilot in India along with two of her cohorts, Mohana Singh Jitarwal, and Bhawana Kanth.


== Scientists ==
Raj Chandra Bose (or Basu) (19 June 1901 – 31 October 1987) was an Indian American mathematician and statistician best known for his work in design theory, finite geometry and the theory of error-correcting codes in which the class of BCH codes is partly named after him.
Narendra Karmarkar, Gwalior, mathematician. Karmarkar developed Karmarkar's algorithm.
Anil Kakodkar, Barwani, ,  nuclear physicist and mechanical engineer
Siddhartha Paul Tiwari FRAS,  academic, technologist and researcher.
D. D. Bhawalkar
Shiv Prasad Kosta
Usha Kulshreshtha
Sudhir Kumar Mishra
Sangita Mukhopadhyay
Manmohan Parida
Vijay Kumar Patodi
Waman Dattatreya Patwardhan
J. S. Rajput
C. K. Raju
N. J. Rao
R. Sankararamakrishnan
V. K. Saraswat
Sharadchandra Shankar Shrikhande
Ajay K. Sood
Har Swarup
Umesh Varshney
V. S. Wakankar
Leela Dube
Usha Kulshreshtha
Shalini Moghe
Mrunalini Devi Puar
Bhakti Yadav


== Business ==
Ramesh Chandra Agarwal, (30 November 1944 – 12 April 2017) was an Indian media proprietor and founder-chairman of the Dainik Bhaskar group of newspapers that has a presence in 14 states of India with 62 editions and has an estimated readership of over 15 million. He started Dainik Bhaskar newspaper at Bhopal in 1958. In 1983 he launched the Indore edition and in 1996 it was produced in Rajasthan. He was on the board of D.B. Corp Limited from its inception.
Sir Seth Hukumchand (or Hukamchand) of Indore, Holkar State (1874–1959) was an Indian industrialist and a prominent leader of the Jain community for about 50 years.
Ganesh Ayyar
Ruda Ladha Chawra
Kailash Chandra Gahtori
Ramnath Goenka
Dara Nusserwanji Khurody
Ravina Raj Kohli
Rajendra Singh Pawar
Kanika Tekriwal


== Nobel Laureates ==
Kailash Satyarthi


== Craftspeople ==
Abdul Kadar Khatri (1961–2019) Master Craftsman
Mohammed Yusuf Khatri


== Educators ==
Frank Anthony
Daya Bai
Janaki Devi Bajaj
Anil Bordia
Annapurna Devi
Leela Dube
Shehla Masood
Shalini Moghe
Sumati Mutatkar
Mrunalini Devi Puar
Vijayalaxmi Sadho
Vidya Shah
Nirmala Srivastava
Shah Jahan Begum of Bhopal
B. P. Tiwari
Siddhartha Paul Tiwari
Kanta Tyagi
Raj Jain (born 17 August 1951) is a professor of computer science and engineering in the Washington University School of Engineering and Applied Science at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri.


== Sport medal Winners ==
Sita Sahu
Varsha Varman
Aditya Joshi
Satendra Singh Lohiya


== Medicine and Doctors ==
Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman, Bhopal born scholar of Unani medicine
Keshavrao Krishnarao Datey cardiologist
Vipin Buckshey
Dipshikha Chakravortty
M. G. Deo
Laxmi Chand Gupta
Hakim Syed Karam Husain
J. S. Mahashabde
G. N. Malviya
B.G. Matapurkar
Gaya Prasad Pal
M. N. Passey
Mrunalini Devi Puar
Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman
Rajendra Prakash Singh
Amit Sood
Shashi Wadhwa
Bhakti Yadav


== Chief Justices of India ==
J.S.Verma, (18 January 1933 – 22 April 2013) was an Indian jurist who served as the 27th Chief Justice of India from 25 March 1997 to 18 January 1998. He was the chairman of the National Human Rights Commission from 1999 to 2003, and chairman of the Justice Verma Committee Report on Amendments to Criminal Law after the 2012 Delhi gang rape case. He remains one of India's most highly regarded Chief Justices and eminent jurists in its history.
Ramesh Chandra Lahoti, (1 November 1940 – 23 March 2022) was the 35th Chief Justice of India, serving from 1 June 2004 to 1 November 2005.


== Judge ==
Jitendra Kumar Maheshwari (born 29 June 1961) is a judge of the Supreme Court of India. He is former chief justice of the Sikkim High Court. Before that, he served as chief justice of the Andhra Pradesh High Court and judge of Madhya Pradesh High Court. He was born in Joura, Madhya Pradesh. He was a practicing lawyer in Gwalior before he got elevated to the bench.


== Governor of RBI ==
Raghuram Rajan, (born 3 February 1963) is an Indian economist and the Katherine Dusak Miller Distinguished Service Professor of Finance at the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business.  Between 2003 and 2006  he was   Chief Economist and director of research at the International Monetary Fund. From September 2013 through September 2016  he was the 23rd Governor of the Reserve Bank of India. In 2015, during his tenure at the RBI, he became the Vice-Chairman of the Bank for International Settlements.


== Hindi and Urdu literature ==
Pandit Makhanlal Chaturvedi (4 April 1889 – 30 January 1968), also called Pandit ji, was an Indian poet, writer, essayist, playwright and a journalist who is particularly remembered for his participation in India's national struggle for independence and his contribution to Chhayavaad, the Neo-romanticism movement of Hindi literature.
Nathuram Premi
Ramkumar Verma
Gajanan Madhav Muktibodh
Harishankar Parsai
Sharad Joshi
Rahat Indori
Rajneesh
Bihari Lal
Abdul Qavi Desnavi
Rahat Indori
Kaif Bhopali
Uday Prakash
Seth Govind Das
Hari Krishna Devsare
Nida Fazli
Anupam Mishra
Balachandra Shastri
Vidya Shah
Mrinal Pande
Vagish Shastri
Khurram Murad
Bhagwan Datt Sharma


== Sports ==
Master Chief Petty Officer Omkar Singh (Hindi: ओमकार सिंह, born 8 August 1984) is an Indian sports shooter. He won three gold medals and a silver medal in shooting events at the 2010 Commonwealth Games held in Delhi. He hails from Anuppur district of Madhya Pradesh and is currently serving the Indian Navy.
Paan Singh Tomar (1 January 1932 — 1 October 1981) was an Indian soldier, athlete, and later, Baaghi (rebel/outlaw).


== Activists ==
Ashif Shaikh (born 18 October 1982) is a social activist from India who has worked for ending sexual violence against women and children, eradication of manual scavenging, forced labour practices and human trafficking in India.  He is the founder of Rashtriya Garima Abhiyan (National Campaign for Dignity) and the non profit organisation,  Jan Sahas.
Alok Agarwal
B. R. Ambedkar
Mabelle Arole
Daya Bai
Rashida Bee
Rajeev John George
Abdul Jabbar Khan
Harsh Mander
Vishal Mangalwadi
Shehla Masood
Lilatai Pradkar
Anand Rai
Satinath Sarangi
Kailash Satyarthi
Vidya Shah
Champa Devi Shukla
Aditya Tiwari
Sunil Verma


== Journalists ==
Makhanlal Chaturvedi
Nathuram Premi
Mrinal Pande
Prabhash Joshi
Deepak Chaurasia


== Actors ==
Source:


=== Male ===
Raj Arjun is an Indian actor who mainly works in Hindi cinema. He has also worked in Tamil, Malayalam and Telugu cinema.  He is the recipient of Zee Cine Awards for  Best Actor In A Negative Role and Indian Television Academy Awards for Best Actor.
Vivian Dsena
Ami Mishra
Anil Mange
Arjun Rampal
Arunoday Singh
Ashok Kumar
Javed Khan
Johnny Walker
Salim Khan
Salman Khan
Praveen Morchhale
Sharat Saxena
Kumar Pallana
Raghuvir Yadav
Swanand Kirkire
Govind Namdev
Ashutosh Rana
Mukesh Tiwari
Shaan
Sharad Kelkar
Annu Kapoor
Rajeev Verma
Mushtaq Khan
Razak Khan
Sachin Nayak
Rishiking
Kartik Aaryan
Sunil Lahri


=== Female ===
Divyanka Tripathi
Isha Malviya
Paridhi Sharma
Lata Mangeshkar
Jaya Bachchan
Ananya Khare
Palak Muchhal
Aishwarya Khare
Kritika Kamra
Mamta Sharma
Sara Khan
Himangini Singh Yadu
Neha Hinge


== Directors ==
Vivek Agnihotri
Sanjay Puran Singh Chauhan
Deepshikha Nagpal
Akhilesh Jaiswal
Saandesh B. Nayak
Baburao Patel
Rishiking
Alok Shrivastava
Aparnaa Singh
Chandrakant Singh
Nitesh Tiwari
Leena Yadav


== Singers ==
Pandit Kumar Gandharva (pronunciation:[kʊmaːɽ ɡɐndʱɐɽʋɐ], Kn: ಕುಮಾರ್ ಗಂಧರ್ವ; 8 April 1924 – 12 January 1992), originally known as Shivaputra Siddharamayya Komkalimath was an Indian classical singer, well known for his unique vocal style and for his refusal to be bound by the tradition of any gharana. The name, Kumar Gandharva, is a title given to him when he was a child prodigy; a Gandharva is a musical spirit in Hindu mythology.
Pandit Mukul Shivputra (born 25 March 1956) (previously known as Mukul Komkalimath) is a Hindustani Classical vocalist of the Gwalior Gharana and the son and foremost disciple of Pt. Kumar Gandharva.
Asgari Bai
Suhit Gosain
Gundecha Brothers
Meenal Jain
Junior Dagar Brothers
Amir Khan (singer)
Swanand Kirkire
Sombala Kumar
Pinky Maidasani
Shashwati Mandal
Lata Mangeshkar
Penaz Masani
Piyush Mishra
Sumati Mutatkar
Madhura Naik
Krishnarao Shankar Pandit
Ritu Pathak
Kavi Pradeep
Madhavapeddi Satyam
Vidya Shah
Mamta Sharma
Jaymala Shiledar
Vayu Shrivastav
Kishore Kumar


== Politics ==
B.R. Ambedkar
Shankar Dayal Sharma, former President of India
Atal Bihari Vajpayee, former PM of India
Kailash Nath Katju
Vijaya Raje Scindia
Madhavrao Scindia, former Union Minister
Paras Chandra Jain, Energy Minister, Government of Madhya Pradesh
Kailash Vijayvargiya, BJP National General Secretary
Kamal Patel, former Minister, Government of Madhya Pradesh
Arjun Singh, politician
Vasundhara Raje
Sharad Yadav
Jaya Bachchan
Sumitra Mahajan
Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia
Prithviraj Chavan
Shivraj Singh Chouhan, current chief minister
Uma Bharti
Digvijaya Singh
Satish Kumar Sharma, politician
Prahlad Pandey, politician


== Hockey ==
Roop Singh
Ahmed Khan
Aslam Sher Khan
Shivendra Singh
Shankar Laxman


== Cricket ==
Mansoor Ali Khan Pataudi
Mushtaq Ali
Chandu Sarwate, former India cricketer.
Amay Khurasiya, former India cricketer.
Narendra Hirwani, former India cricketer.
C. K. Nayudu
Sanjay Jagdale
Narendra Menon
Sudhir Asnani
Rahul Dravid, Indian cricketer born in Indore.
Amay Khurasiya
Jai Prakash Yadav
Naman Ojha
Devendra Bundela
Nuzhat Parween
Ishwar Pandey


== Militants ==
Safdar Nagori


== Skiing ==
Himanshu Thakur


== Information Technology and Research ==
Siddhartha Paul Tiwari FRAS (born 1979) is an academic, technologist and researcher. Currently, he works with Google Asia Pacific, Singapore. Prior to this, he led Google's global learning and development efforts from Tokyo. He is known for his work in the areas of e-governance, mobile technologies, digital intervention strategies, and information and communication technologies (ICTs).
Surya Narayan Vyas (2 March 1902 in Ujjain, India – 22 June 1976) was an Indian astrologer and diviner from Ujjain, in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh.


== Contribution in other fields ==
Ratnesh Pandey (born 12 May 1985) is an Indian mountaineer, who climbed Mount Everest in 2016.
V. S. Pathak (1926–2003) was a historian, Sanskrit scholar and an Indologist who authored several books.


== See also ==
List of people by India state


== References ==