Magatsu Wahrheit (Japanese: 禍つヴァールハイト, Hepburn: Magatsu Vāruhaito; transl. "Evil Truth") is a massively multiplayer online role-playing game for smartphones that is developed and published by KLab. The game is powered by Unity, and was made available for Android and iOS in April 2019 in Japan. An anime television series adaptation produced by Yokohama Animation Laboratory aired from October to December 2020.


== Synopsis ==
The game is set in a world that has been destroyed by ten "lights" (Japanese: 光) and follows the mobile corps, a research organization by those who gained power from the "lights".


== Characters ==
Innumael (イヌマエル, Innumaeru)
Voiced by: Atsushi Abe (Japanese); Aleks Le (English)
Innumael Grauer is a young man involved in the transportation industry. He is a smuggler, whom his colleagues have nicknamed "The Dog". One day, Leocadio helps him load the truck faster, but accidentally loads two packages not meant for delivery. Innumael finishes loading the packages and drives the truck to its destination. He gets stopped at a customs check point where a guard checks the packages, which are revealed to house weapons. Innumael is imprisoned for smuggling, but is broken out by the smuggling organization Headkeeper. Innumael and his rescuers escape and are branded criminals.
Unable to go back to his old life, Innumael is forced to stay with Headkeeper and helps them throughout their journey across the Empire. Although he is initially timid and reluctant to get into fights, he nevertheless proves himself capable in surviving the multiple problems that Headkeeper encounters.
Leocadio (レオカディオ, Reokadio)
Voiced by: Yūki Ono (Japanese); Stephen Sanders (English)
A serious young man who belongs to the Zeroth Platoon of the Wahrheit Imperial Army. Leocadio lives with his siblings and Seitz, a childhood friend. On his first day as an imperial soldier, Leocadio sees a delivery man being scolded for slacking off and decides to help him load his truck but ends uploading goods that shouldn't have been loaded. Later, Leocadio and his squad are assigned to transport a criminal who smuggled goods, who ends up being Innumael Grauer. But as Innumael was freed from prison by the Headkeeper smuggling organization, Leocadio's commander Helman manages to locate them and engage them in a fight.
During the fight, Seitz is killed by Immanuel, who was just trying to protect Schaake, the woman who saved him. Although he is distracted by Seitz's death, he does not believe Immanuel to be a criminal and tries to discover Immanuel's connection to Headkeeper. Unfortunately, Helman, Leocadio's commanding officer, becomes obsessed with destroying Headkeeper and uses Sissel, Innumael's sister, as a hostage in exchange for Innumael's execution. Leocadio saves Sissel but is forced to kill Helman, branding himself as a criminal in the process, and has no choice but to join Headkeeper as a way to investigate the Empire's corruption.
Schaake Gutheil (シャアケ・グートハイル, Shaake Gūtohairu)
Voiced by: Yumiri Hanamori (Japanese); Felecia Angelle (English)
Schaake Gutheil is a member of the noble Gutheil family and also an operative for Headkeeper. She is a mage on the team led by Arnold. Schaake and other Headkeeper members go to take a package that was for them, but learn that the package was incorrectly loaded into a truck and transported out of the base. As Schaake tries to track it down, the group learns that a delivery driver was arrested for smuggling weapons, and realize it is their package.
The driver, Innumael, is arrested by Imperial authorities but Schaake and her team break him out of prison. They are ambushed by an Imperial squad and Schaake is almost killed by Seitz, until Innumael kills Seitz to save her. Since he has nowhere to go, Schaake allows Innumael to stay with Headkeeper. During the journey, she also reveals herself to be a noblewoman.
Elfriede (エルフリーデ, Erufurīde)
Voiced by: Yukiyo Fujii (Japanese); Erica Mendez (English)
Elfriede is a member of the smuggling organization Headkeeper. Her role is to infiltrate the Imperial Capital and carry out solo intelligence missions. She infiltrates the Imperial Capital and learns that money from Headkeeper is flowing into Diet. She realizes there is a traitor among them and informs Fritz, who later tells her to investigate a mental institution that was closed years ago. Believing that this may also lead her to finding the traitor, she infiltrates it and learns that Mary Bult is involved in secret human experiments but is caught before she is able to escape. Arnold and Benjamin lead a rescue mission and manage to find her in a capsule in the mental institution.
Unfortunately, Professor Radovaud, the scientist in charge of the institution, has irrevocably turned Elfriede into a monster and she goes on a rampage, threatening friend and foe alike. Headkeeper is forced to kill her, but Elfriede uses her last moments to reveal her information to her comrades.
Helman (ヘルマン, Heruman)
Voiced by: Kenjiro Tsuda (Japanese); Ian Sinclair (English)
Helman is the captain of the Zeroth Platoon of the Wahrheit Empire. He was the bastard son of a noble and a maid. He and his mother endured a terrible life at the hands of his father. After his mother committed suicide, Helman became a serial killer and blamed his murders on his father, causing him to be arrested.
He assigns Leocadio Wöhler to Seitz. They are assigned to take a criminal back to the capital, and go to take him, but learn there was a prison break and Headkeeper smugglers took the man, Innumael Grauer. Helman deduces that Headkeeper is attempting to mislead them and leads the platoon in the opposite direction, where they find Headkeeper members. Unable to run, Headkeeper engages in a fight and Helman injures Damian, but Seitz dies. He takes Damian as prisoner but does not report that he is still alive, and tortures him to learn about Headkeeper's hideout in the next city. He locks down the city, but Headkeeper manages to escape.
His obsession with destroying Headkeeper causes him to kidnap Innumael's sister and use her as a hostage in exchange for Innumael's execution, forcing Leocadio to kill him so he can save Sissel.
Arnold (アルノルト, Arunoruto)
Voiced by: Kenichirou Matsuda (Japanese); Ray Hurd (English)
Arnold is a member of Headkeeper. Arnold and other Headkeeper members go to retrieve a package that was meant for them, but learn it was wrongly loaded into a truck and transported out of the base. While tracking it down, they learn that Innumael is arrested for smuggling weapons and realize it is their package. They make a plan and Arnold leads them to break into prison and save the driver and take their package. While running, Helman leads imperial soldiers, manages to find them and engages them in combat. Losing the fight, they create explosions to distract the imperial soldiers and manage to escape.
Benjamin (ベンジャミン)
Voiced by: Junichi Yanagita (Japanese); Mark Allen Jr. (English)
Benjamin is a member of Arnold's team. He and other Headkeeper members go to retrieve a package that was meant for them, but learn that the package was wrongly loaded into a truck and transported out of the base.
Klaus (クラウス, Kurausu)
Voiced by: Ryōta Suzuki (Japanese); Cody Savoie (English)
A member of Arnold's team.
Conrad (コンラッド, Konraddo)
Voiced by: Kazuyuki Okitsu (Japanese); Billy Kametz (English)
Conrad Wisdom is a senior soldier of the Warheit Imperial Army in the Magatsu Wahrheit: Zuerst anime series. He is Leocadio's senior and Seitz's younger brother. He is ordered by Helman to take a prisoner back to the capital, who is freed by Headkeeper, and his platoon ends up chasing them and engage in a fight, where Seitz dies. The soldiers follow Headkeeper to the next town, but the organization manages to escape. He and Leocadio are later assigned to find and retrieve Sissel, Innumael Grauer's little sister.
Fritz (フリッツ, Furittsu)
Voiced by: Tarusuke Shingaki (Japanese); Christopher Bevins (English)
A member of Headkeeper and leader of the organization's branch in the Imperial capital.
Seitz (ザイツ, Zaitsu)
Voiced by: Takuya Satō (Japanese); Jason Liebrecht (English)
A close friend and squadmate of Leocadio. During Leocadio's first mission, he is unexpectedly killed by Innumael in an attempt to protect Schaake.
Damian (ダミアン)
Voiced by: Taishi Murata (Japanese); Austin Tindle (English)
A member of the Headkeeper team.
Shisel (シセル, Shiseru)
Voiced by: Aya Yamane (Japanese); Bryn Apprill (English)
Innumael's younger sister. After the death of their parents, Innumael raised her all by himself, even using what little money he earned to put her through school. She lived a quiet life in a secluded village until she is found by Leocadio and Conrad, who inform her that Innumael was involved in fight that resulted in the death of Seitz, an Imperial soldier. Although she does not believe her brother to be a murderer, she nevertheless agrees to come to the Imperial capital as a person of interest.
She is later taken hostage by Helman, who wants to kill Innumael as punishment for killing an Imperial soldier, and Leocadio is forced to kill Helman as a way to save her.
Marie (マリー, Marī)
Voiced by: Masako Katsuki
An influential member of the Diet, the Empire's religious organization.
Professor Radovaud (ラドバウド博士, Radobaudo Hakase)
Voiced by: Katsuyuki Konishi (Japanese); J. Michael Tatum (English)
An Imperial scientist in charge of a mental institution that secretly performs illegal experiments on humans. He captures Elfriede and turns her into a monster.
Jade (ジェイド, Jeido)
Voiced by: Minoru Shiraishi (Japanese); Kiba Walker (English)
Leader of Headkeeper's branch in the Imperial capital and double agent working for the Empire.
Lotus (ロータス, Rōtasu)
Voiced by: Shinya Takahashi (Japanese); Kaiji Tang (English)
Patriarch of the Guthiel family and Schaake's father.
Irma (イルマ, Iruma)
Voiced by: Maria Naganawa (Japanese); Sarah Wiedenheft (English)
Irma is a Headkeeper member of the Teito branch. In a hideout at the capital, Irma recognizes Innumael Grauer from wanted posters. After Fritz instructs them on the rescue operation, Irma and Innumael are placed on lookout. Innumael sees Leocadio and heads out. After he returns, he tells her that the imperial army knows of their actions and that it is a trap. They form an escape plan. Innumael leads the Imperial soldiers away, who end up following him. After losing them in the warehouse he works at, Irma arrives to pick him up with the car and they escape.
Faust (ファウスト, Fausuto)
Voiced by: Tomokazu Sugita (Japanese); Griffin Puatu (English)
A neighbor of Leocadio and worker in pharmaceutical development.


== Media ==


=== Game ===
The game was developed and published by KLab using the Unity game engine. It was released in Japan on April 23, 2019, on Android and iOS. Mobimon licensed the game for global release in October 2020. The Japanese version ended service on March 31, 2021, while Global version ended service on February 25, 2022, due to expired licensing rights.


=== Anime ===
An anime adaptation was announced on March 24, 2018, and aired on April 23, 2020. The series was produced by Yokohama Animation Lab and aired from October 13 to December 29, 2020, on Tokyo MX, BS11, Wowow, and MBS. The opening theme "Kimi wo Sukueru nara Boku wa Naninimo naru" (君を救えるなら僕は何にでもなる; "I Can Do Anything if I Can Save You") was performed by Maon Kurosaki, while the ending theme "Disclose" was performed by Helical. In Southeast Asia, the series is licensed by Muse Communication and released on YouTube. Funimation acquired the series and streamed it on its website in North America and the British Isles.


==== Episode list ====


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website (in Japanese)
Official anime website (in Japanese)
Magatsu Wahrheit (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia