Yahoo ( , styled yahoo! in its logo) is an American web portal that provides the search engine Yahoo Search and related services including My Yahoo, Yahoo Mail, Yahoo News, Yahoo Finance, Yahoo Sports, y!entertainment, yahoo!life, and its advertising platform, Yahoo Native. It is operated by the namesake company Yahoo! Inc., which is 90% owned by Apollo Global Management and 10% by Verizon.
Yahoo was established by Jerry Yang and David Filo in January 1994 and was one of the pioneers of the early Internet era in the 1990s. However, its use declined in the 2010s as some of its services were discontinued, and it lost market share to Facebook and Google.


== Etymology ==
The word "yahoo" is a backronym for "Yet Another Hierarchically Organized Oracle" or "Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle". The term "hierarchical" described how the Yahoo database was arranged in layers of subcategories. The term "oracle" was intended to mean "source of truth and wisdom", and the term "officious", rather than being related to the word's normal meaning, described the many office workers who would use the Yahoo database while surfing from work. However, founders Filo and Yang insist they mainly selected the name because they liked the slang definition of a "yahoo" (used by college students in David Filo's native Louisiana in the late 1980s and early 1990s to refer to an unsophisticated, rural Southerner): "rude, unsophisticated, uncouth." This meaning derives from the Yahoo race of fictional beings from Gulliver's Travels.


== History ==


=== Founding ===

In January 1994, Jerry Yang and David Filo were electrical engineering graduate students at Stanford University, when they created a website named "Jerry and David's guide to the World Wide Web". The site was a human-edited web directory, organized in a hierarchy, as opposed to a searchable index of pages. In March 1994, "Jerry and David's Guide to the World Wide Web" was renamed "Yahoo!" and became known as the Yahoo Directory. The "yahoo.com" domain was registered on January 18, 1995.
Yahoo was incorporated on March 2, 1995. In 1995, a search engine function, called Yahoo Search, was introduced. This allowed users to search Yahoo Directory. Yahoo soon became the first popular online directory and search engine on the World Wide Web.


=== Expansion ===

Yahoo grew rapidly throughout the 1990s. Yahoo became a public company via an initial public offering in April 1996 and its stock price rose 600% within two years. Like many search engines and web directories, Yahoo added a web portal, putting it in competition with services including Excite, Lycos, and America Online. By 1998, Yahoo was the most popular starting point for web users, and the human-edited Yahoo Directory the most popular search engine, receiving 95 million page views per day, triple that of rival Excite. It also made many high-profile acquisitions. Yahoo began offering free e-mail from October 1997 after the acquisition of RocketMail, which was then renamed to Yahoo Mail. In 1998, Yahoo replaced AltaVista as the crawler-based search engine underlying the Directory with Inktomi. Yahoo's two biggest acquisitions were made in 1999: GeoCities for $3.6 billion and Broadcast.com for $5.7 billion.
Its stock price skyrocketed during the dot-com bubble, closing at an all-time high of $118.75/share on January 3, 2000. However, after the dot-com bubble burst, it reached a post-bubble low of $8.11 on September 26, 2001.


==== Missed acquisitions of Google ====
Yahoo had two critical opportunities to acquire Google that it did not pursue. In 1998, Google's founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin approached Yahoo to sell their nascent search engine for $1 million, but Yahoo declined the offer.
A more significant opportunity arose in 2002, when Yahoo's then-CEO, Terry Semel, entered into negotiations to purchase Google. Google was reportedly seeking a price of $5 billion. After weeks of negotiation, Yahoo's final offer was $3 billion, a figure that Google's leadership rejected, leading them to terminate the deal. The failure to acquire Google in this second instance is widely considered one of the largest strategic errors in corporate history.
Yahoo began using Google for search in June 2000. Over the next four years, it developed its own search technologies, which it began using in 2004 partly using technology from its $280 million acquisition of Inktomi in 2002. In 2003, Yahoo acquired Overture Services, Inc. (formerly GoTo.com) for $1.63 billion. The deal was a strategic move to bolster its search advertising revenue in the face of growing competition from Google, as Overture was a pioneer in pay-per-click advertising. In response to Google's Gmail, Yahoo began to offer unlimited email storage in 2007. In 2008, the company laid off hundreds of people as it struggled from competition.
In February 2008, Microsoft made an unsolicited bid to acquire Yahoo for $44.6 billion. Yahoo rejected the bid, claiming that it "substantially undervalues" the company and was not in the interest of its shareholders. Although Microsoft increased its bid to $47 billion, Yahoo insisted on another 10%+ increase to the offer and Microsoft cancelled the offer in May 2008.
On December 12, 2014, Yahoo acquired video advertising provider BrightRoll for $583 million.
On November 21, 2014, Yahoo acquired Cooliris.


=== Decline, sale, and post-acquisition era ===

In July 2009, after months of negotiation, Yahoo and Microsoft finalized a 10-year agreement known as the Yahoo and Microsoft Search Alliance. Under the terms of the alliance, Yahoo's websites would utilize Microsoft's Bing for algorithmic search results, while Yahoo's sales team became the exclusive sales force for both companies' premium search advertisers. The partnership required a complex migration of Yahoo's search technology and advertising platform to Microsoft's adCenter (later rebranded to Bing Ads), with the transition for advertisers and organic search results completed in October 2010.
Carol Bartz, former CEO of Autodesk, replaced Yang as CEO in January 2009. In September 2011, she was fired by chairman Roy J. Bostock. The dismissal happened over the phone, a fact Bartz promptly communicated to employees in a widely publicized company-wide email. CFO Tim Morse was named as Interim CEO of the company.
After the brief tenure of Scott Thompson, who was replaced on an interim basis by Ross Levinsohn, Yahoo appointed Google executive Marissa Mayer as president and CEO, effective July 17, 2012.


==== Tenure of Marissa Mayer ====
Upon her arrival, Mayer implemented several significant cultural and strategic changes. One of her first major policy decisions in 2013 was to revoke the company's remote work option, requiring all employees to work from the office to foster a more collaborative culture. She also initiated an aggressive acquisition strategy, purchasing over 50 startups, many of which were small, mobile-focused companies in an "acqui-hiring" approach to bring in new engineering talent.
In June 2013, Yahoo acquired blogging site Tumblr for $1.1 billion in cash. While the acquisition was intended to attract a younger audience, it failed to meet revenue targets. In 2016, Yahoo wrote down $712 million of Tumblr's value, acknowledging the acquisition had not paid off. Verizon later sold Tumblr in 2019 for a fraction of its purchase price.
Mayer's efforts to revitalize company culture included a controversial quarterly performance review (QPR) system implemented in 2013. The system required managers to rank employees on a bell curve, with those at the bottom often being terminated. The policy was unpopular with many employees and led to a 2016 lawsuit from a former manager who alleged the system was used to conduct illegal mass layoffs.
Despite some positive metrics, such as a temporary increase in website traffic in 2013, the turnaround effort stalled. By January 2014, doubts about Mayer's progress emerged when she fired her high-profile COO hire, Henrique de Castro. By December 2015, Mayer was facing intense criticism as performance declined. In February 2016, Mayer announced layoffs amounting to 15% of the Yahoo workforce.


==== Sale to Verizon ====
On July 25, 2016, Verizon Communications announced the acquisition of Yahoo's core Internet business for $4.83 billion. The deal, which excluded Yahoo's stakes in Alibaba Group and Yahoo Japan, was delayed by the revelation of major data breaches. On February 21, 2017, Verizon lowered its purchase price for Yahoo by $350 million and reached an agreement to share liabilities regarding the data breaches. On June 13, 2017, Verizon completed the acquisition and Marissa Mayer resigned.
Yahoo, AOL, and HuffPost were then combined under a new company, Oath Inc., later called Verizon Media. The parts of the original Yahoo! Inc. not purchased by Verizon were renamed Altaba and liquidated in 2020.


==== Post-Verizon era ====
In September 2021, investment funds managed by Apollo Global Management acquired 90% of Yahoo. In November 2021, Yahoo announced that it was ending operations in mainland China due to the increasingly challenging business and legal environment.
In February 2023, Yahoo announced plans to lay off 20% of its total workforce by the end of the year, impacting more than 1,600 employees, as part of a major restructuring of its ad tech division. Following the acquisition by Apollo, CEO Jim Lanzone initiated a strategy focused on a potential "turnaround", emphasizing the integration of artificial intelligence across Yahoo's products. This strategy included several key acquisitions, such as Commonstock in 2023 and the AI-driven news platform Artifact in 2024.


== Data breaches ==

On September 22, 2016, Yahoo disclosed a data breach that occurred in late 2014, in which information associated with at least 500 million user accounts, one of the largest breaches reported to date. The United States indicted four men, including two employees of Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB), for their involvement in the hack. On December 14, 2016, the company revealed that another separate data breach had occurred in 2014, with hackers obtaining sensitive account information, including security questions, to at least one billion accounts. The company stated that hackers had utilized stolen internal software to forge HTTP cookies.
On October 3, 2017, the company stated that all 3 billion of its user accounts were affected by the August 2013 theft.


== Criticism ==


=== DMCA notice to whistleblower ===
On November 30, 2009, Yahoo was criticized by the Electronic Frontier Foundation for sending a DMCA notice to whistleblower website "Cryptome" for publicly posting details, prices, and procedures on obtaining private information pertaining to Yahoo's subscribers.


=== Censorship of private emails affiliated with Occupy Wall Street protests ===
After some concerns over censorship of private emails regarding a website affiliated with Occupy Wall Street protests were raised, Yahoo responded with an apology and explained it as an accident.


== Partners and sponsorships ==

On September 11, 2001, Yahoo announced its partnership with FIFA for the 2002 FIFA World Cup and 2006 FIFA World Cup tournaments. It was one of FIFA's 15 partners at the tournaments. The deal included co-branding the organization's websites.
Yahoo sponsored the 2012 Sundance Film Festival.
NBC Sports Group aligned with Yahoo Sports the same year with content and program offerings on mobile and desktop platforms.
Yahoo announced television video partnerships in 2013 with Condé Nast, WWE, ABC NEWS, and CNBC. Yahoo entered into a 10-year collaboration in 2014, as a founding partner of Levi's Stadium, home of the San Francisco 49ers.
The National Basketball Association partnered with Yahoo Sports to stream games, offer virtual and augmented-reality fan experiences, and in 2018 NBA League Pass. Yahoo Sportsbook launched in November 2019, a collaboration with BetMGM.
BuzzFeed acquired HuffPost from Yahoo in November 2020, in a stock deal with Yahoo as a minority shareholder. The NFL partnered with Yahoo in 2020, to introduce a new "Watch Together" function on the Yahoo Sports app for interactive co-viewing through a synchronized livestream of local and primetime NFL games. The Paley Center for Media collaborated with Verizon Media to exclusively stream programs on Yahoo platforms beginning in 2020.
Yahoo became the main sponsor for the Pramac Racing team and the first title sponsor for the 2021 ESport/MotoGP Championship season. Yahoo, the official partner for the September 2021 New York Fashion Week event also unveiled sponsorship for the Rebecca Minkoff collection via a NFT space. In September 2021, it was announced that Yahoo partnered with Shopify, connecting the e-commerce merchants on Yahoo Finance, AOL and elsewhere.


== See also ==

List of Yahoo-owned sites and services
List of search engines
Yahoo litigation


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Yahoo products and services
ALTABA and Yahoo EDGAR filing history