The Australian property market comprises the trade of land and its permanent fixtures located within Australia. The average Australian property price grew 0.5% per year from 1890 to 1990 after inflation, however rose from 1990 to 2017 at a faster rate. House prices in Australia receive considerable attention from the media and the Reserve Bank and some commentators have argued that there is an Australian property bubble.
The residential housing market has seen drastic changes in prices in the past few decades. The property prices are soaring in major cities like Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth, Brisbane and Hobart. The median house price in Sydney peaked at $780,000 in 2016. However, with stricter credit policy and reduced interest from foreign investors in residential property, prices have started falling in all the major cities. When compared with the soaring prices of 2017, the housing prices fell by 11.1% in Sydney and 7.2% in Melbourne in 2018.  In 2022 the residential rental market has seen a significant increase in rents, which has been described as a 'rental crisis'.
In 2025, national home values pushed to fresh highs. As at August 2025, values rose 0.7% for the month and 4.1% year-on-year, with Brisbane (+1.2%), Perth (+1.1%) and Darwin (+1.0%) leading monthly gains, while Hobart declined (–0.6%). Sydney’s median dwelling value is about $1.224 million and back at peak. Rents increased 0.5% in August and the vacancy rate remained near 1.5%, keeping pressure on tenants; auction clearance rates tracked around 70% ahead of spring. Investor gross yields sat near 3.7% nationally (about 4.4% across regionals). However, governments tightened short-stay rules; Victoria introduced a 7.5% levy on stays under 28 days (from 1 January), NSW reinforced its STRA registration/day-cap framework, and Byron Shire proceeded with a 60-day non-hosted cap.


== Description ==


=== Composition ===
In 2011 there were 8.6m households with an average household size of 2.6 persons per household. Freestanding houses have historically comprised most building approvals, but recent data shows a trend towards higher density housing such as townhouses and units. Turnover rates vary across market cycles, but typically average 6% per year. Since 1999-2000 the proportion of households renting from state/territory housing authorities has declined from 6% to 3%  while the proportion renting privately increased from 20% to 26% in 2019-20.


== Regional variations ==
The Australian property market is non-uniform, with high variation observed across the major cities and regional areas.


=== Sydney ===

In Sydney, as of March 2010, the Property Market's vacancy rate reached 0.53% signalling that the market is recovering, as these rates had reached 2% in August 2009. As of July 2015, the Property Market in Sydney has surged in the first Q of 2015, up 3.1%. Sydney's eastern and northern suburbs typically attract the highest prices, reflecting their desirability and premium location. The annual capital growth for houses and units in Sydney is 4.2% and 3.8% respectively.


== Key issues ==


=== Affordability ===

In the late 2000s, housing prices in Australia, relative to average incomes, were among the highest in the world. As at 2011, house prices were on average six times average household income, compared to four times in 1990. This prompted speculation that the country was experiencing a real estate bubble, like many other countries.
A 2025 industry analysis estimated that Australia needs to build an average of 225,400 new dwellings annually to 2034 in order to meet both new and historic housing demand.


=== Immigration to Australia ===


==== 2000s ====
In 2006, the Sydney Morning Herald reported on Macquarie Bank analyst Rory Robertson's analysis of Australian housing affordability. Robertson had criticized claims by then-Prime Minister John Howard that state government land release policies were the main driver of high house prices. He argued that a number of factors including high immigration, lower interest rates since the early 1990s, and investor activity, had a greater impact on housing costs. Robertson repeated this claim again in 2007 in an article from The Australian where he believed that high immigration and the propensity of new arrivals to cluster in the capital cities is exacerbating the nation's housing affordability problem.
The Productivity Commission Inquiry Report No. 28 First Home Ownership (2004) also stated, in relation to housing, "that Growth in immigration since the mid-1990s has been an important contributor to underlying demand, particularly in Sydney and Melbourne." This has been exacerbated by Australian lenders relaxing credit guidelines for temporary residents, allowing them to buy a home with a 10 percent deposit. The RBA in its submission to the same PC Report also stated "rapid growth in overseas visitors such as students may have boosted demand for rental housing". However, in question in the report was the statistical coverage of resident population. The "ABS population growth figures omit certain household formation groups – namely, overseas students and business migrants who do not continuously stay for 12 months in Australia." This statistical omission lead to the admission: "The Commission recognises that the ABS resident population estimates have limitations when used for assessing housing demand. Given the significant influx of foreigners coming to work or study in Australia in recent years, it seems highly likely that short-stay visitor movements may have added to the demand for housing. However, the Commissions are unaware of any research that quantifies the effects."
In a 2008 Senate report, some individuals and interest groups have also argued that immigration causes overburdened infrastructure.


==== 2020s ====
More recently in 2025, multiple studies have debunked the notion that immigration and foreign property purchases are the primary drivers of Australia's housing crisis. Instead, multiple experts point to factors such as limited housing supply, tax incentives for investors, and broader demand-side pressures as the primary contributors.
A comprehensive study by the University of South Australia, published in March 2025, analyzed rental data from 2017 to 2024 and found no statistically significant correlation between international student numbers and rising rents. Lead researcher Professor Michael Mu emphasized that international students were unfairly blamed for the rental crisis, stating they were "thrown under the bus" and made an "easy target" for politicians.
Supporting this view, a July 2025 paper by the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) concluded that the rapid growth in international student numbers post-pandemic did not substantially contribute to higher rents or inflation. The RBA acknowledged that while the increase in student numbers likely had some impact, it was not a major driver of the housing affordability issues.
Further research by The Australia Institute, published in April 2025, support this view. Analysis of population trends shows that even during periods of low migration, house prices increased substantially, and Australia’s population is still below the level it would have reached had pre-COVID growth continued. The Institute identifies other factors as the main contributors to housing unaffordability, including insufficient construction of low-cost housing and rental properties, combined with a market favoring property investors.
A 2025 Guardian article reported on modelling by Brendan Rynne, Chief Economist at KPMG, showing that slashing migration could paradoxically lead to higher house prices. In a thought experiment where population growth is reduced to natural increases only, Australia would have 29 million residents by 2035 instead of 31.2 million—a reduction of 2.2 million people.
A smaller labour force would increase competition among employers for workers, raising wages by 7.5% and slightly lowering unemployment. However, reduced population growth would also strain Australia’s ability to fund essential services, particularly as the population ages, and would cumulatively increase house prices by 2.3% over a decade relative to the base case with ongoing migration. Rynne notes that lower demand for housing is outweighed by the shortage of workers available to build new homes, while higher wages contribute to inflation, eroding the benefits of increased pay.
Overall, while migration is not a panacea for all economic challenges, Brendan Rynne emphasizes that a well-managed migration program is likely to provide net economic benefits over the long term.


=== Foreign investment in residential property ===
In December 2008, the federal government introduced legislation relaxing rules for foreign buyers of Australian property. According to FIRB (Foreign Investment Review Board) data released in August 2009, foreign investment in Australian real estate had increased by more than 30% year to date. One agent said that "overseas investors buy them to land bank, not to rent them out. The houses just sit vacant because they are after capital growth."
In 2015, an opinion piece by journalist Michael West claimed that many Chinese buyers were investing in Australian property and suggested that some of the funds may have originated from illegitimate sources. He cited James Tee, an ethnic Chinese property developer, who argued that the outflow of capital from China was accelerating due to the Chinese government's anti-corruption campaign. West urged closer scrutiny of foreign investment and stronger enforcement of existing laws to ensure that illicit money was not being laundered through the Australian property market.
In 2021, the Guardian reported on a survey that found over 80% of Australians thought Chinese investors were driving up house prices. But CoreLogic's research shows foreign investment has been falling since 2014 and isn’t big enough to explain recent price rises. Instead, low interest rates, strong buyer demand, and limited housing supply are the main drivers. The survey’s lead author, Elena Collinson, said media coverage had made foreign investors an 'easy target," even though the evidence doesn’t support it.
A 2025 poll, found that 69% of Australians polled supported a temporary 2 year ban on foreign investment in residential property, only 9% were opposed and 22% were unsure. A second question found that 47% supported a permanent ban, while 29% supported temporary ban and 23% were Undecided.
In April 2025 the ABC reported on Tasmanian House open-source housing project returning agency to owner-builders by providing clear, practical plans that enable people to construct their own homes without relying on expensive, inaccessible housing markets. These designs offer a pathway to self-sufficiency, affordability, and community resilience.
As of 2025, most foreign investors are restricted to buying new or off-the-plan properties, not existing homes. Critics argue that extra stamp duties and surcharges discourage this investment, draining capital from new developments and worsening shortages. The Housing Industry Association (HIA) stresses that foreign investment does not drive demand but instead funds the construction of new homes. HIA Chief Economist Tim Reardon explained: 'Foreign institutional capital does not create housing demand. It creates supply, and Australia cannot build 1.2 million new homes in five years while taxing the capital that is necessary to build those homes." He further warned that taxing this capital reduces the supply of homes being built just as migration continues to surge and create demand — calling it 'the worst own goal in the myriads of housing policy mistakes."


=== Negative gearing ===

Australian property investors often apply the practice of negative gearing. This occurs when the investor borrows money to fund the purchase of the property, and the income generated by the property is less than the cost of owning and managing the property including interest. The investor is expecting that capital gains will compensate for the shortfall. Negative gearing receives considerable media and political attention due to the perceived distortion it creates on residential property prices. In anticipation of Labor being elected in the 2019 federal election, the banks issued less interest only loans which are used by many investors for negative gearing.
In March 2025, The Australia Institute assorted that investor-focused tax policies have played a major role in driving up house prices in Australia. In particular, the 50% capital gains tax discount has encouraged speculation by reducing the tax on profits from property investment, contributing to a rise in demand and higher prices over the past two decades. The institute argues that these tax incentives, rather than foreign buyers or population growth, are a primary factor in declining housing affordability, and that reforms to capital gains taxation could help reduce speculative pressure on the housing market.


=== Residential rental market ===

In 2022 the Australian residential rental market saw an annual increase in rents of 12%, the strongest increase in 14 years. Across Australia the vacancy rate was 1%, when a rate below 2% is considered very competitive with affordability constraints impacting tenants. A number of sources have described the situation as a 'rental crisis'.
The primary reason for the rental crisis is a lack of supply due to a variety of reasons, including existing landlords selling their rental properties which are being purchased by owner-occupiers and some landlords using their properties on the short term rental market such as Airbnb. Other commentators cited a lack of social housing being provided by the government. The COVID-19 pandemic also impacted the rental market with shared households reducing in size and city workers moving to regional areas due to increased remote work.


== See also ==
Australian property bubble
Home ownership in Australia
Homelessness in Australia
Housing in Victoria


== References ==