China Merchants Bank (CMB) (Chinese: 招商银行; pinyin: Zhāoshāng Yínháng) is a Chinese bank headquartered in Futian District, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China. Founded in 1987, it is the first share-holding commercial bank wholly owned by corporate legal entities in China. CMB listed on the Shanghai Stock Exchange in 2002 and the Hong Kong Stock Exchange in 2006.
CMB has over five hundred branches in mainland China and one in Hong Kong. In November 2007, as part of a drive for international growth, it won federal approval to open a branch in New York City. In 2008, China Merchants Bank was the first Chinese bank to open a branch in the United States.
On 19 January 2016, with the approval of the China Banking Regulatory Commission and the UK financial regulatory authorities, China Merchants Bank officially opened its London branch. This is the first branch of a Chinese joint-stock bank to be approved in the UK. 
In October 2021, it was assessed and designated as a Domestic Systemically Important Bank.
In 2023, China Merchants Bank was ranked 26th in Forbes Global 2000.


== Business areas ==
CMB operates the following businesses:

Personal Banking, including personal savings, personal loans, foreign exchange and  stock trading, gold trading and bank card services, among others.
Corporate & Investment Banking, including corporate savings, corporate loans, international settlements, trade financing, assets custody, M&A advisory, FX, fixed income, syndication among others.
As of 31 December 2008, the Bank had 44 branches and 623 sub-branches, one representative, one credit card center, one credit loan center for small companies, as well as 1,567 self-service banks in China.
By 2017, China Merchants Bank had about 140 branches, more than 1,670 sub-branches, 3,500 self-service centers and more than 11,850 self-service machines (including 1,720 ATMs). Approximately 80 million credit cards were issued, of which 46 million were active, so that the bank was one of the largest credit card issuers in the country.
The bank had branches and representative offices in New York, London, Hong Kong, Singapore, Luxembourg and Taipei.


== Headquarters ==
The China Merchants Bank Headquarters are located in Shenzhen, China. Part of the modernization and development of the city in the early 2000s. Architects, Lee/Timchula architects also designed the central city plan for Shenzhen and the focal building, the Shenzhen Civic Center.


== References ==


== External links ==

China Merchants Bank Company Limited official website
Harvard Business School case study 'China Merchants Bank: Here Just For You'
Harvard Business School case study 'China Merchants Bank in Transition'
Harvard Business School case study 'China Merchants Bank: Business Model Transformation'
Company profile on Sogou Baike