Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) was adopted in May 2020. To tackle the COVID-19 health and economic crisis, development banks suspended debt service payments from the poorest countries that asked this suspension. Thus 73 low- and lower-middle-income countries could devote to COVID-19 expenses the money they should have paid for their debts with these banks: US$4.6 billion. DSSI was further complemented by additional financing provided by the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and other development banks.
DSSI expired at the end of December 2021.


== Beneficiary countries ==
The countries which suspended their debt service under DSSI were Afghanistan, Angola, Burkina Faso, Burundi
Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica, Ethiopia, Fiji, The Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya
Kyrgyz Republic, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Myanmar
Nepal, Niger, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, São Tomé and Príncipe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, St. Lucia, 
St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Togo, Tonga, Uganda, Yemen and Zambia.


== Requirements ==
Each beneficiary country will be required:

to use the created fiscal space to increase social, health or economic spending in
response to the crisis;

to disclose all public sector financial commitments, respecting commercially
sensitive information; and

to contract no new non-concessional debt during the suspension period.


== Common Framework ==
After DSSI (a provisional scheme) expired, the G20 established a permanent mechanism to help low-income countries dealing with huge debt: the Common Framework. But only four countries have asked to restructure their debt under this mechanism: Chad, Ethiopia, Zambia and Ghana.


== See also ==
Debt relief
Debt service ratio
Debt service coverage ratio
Developing countries' debt
External debt
Government debt (public debt)
Heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC)
Millennium Development Goals
Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI)
Odious debt


== References ==