The Global Peace Index (GPI) is a report produced by the Australia-based NGO Institute for Economics & Peace (IEP) which measures the relative position of nations' and regions' peacefulness. The GPI ranks 163 independent states and territories (collectively accounting for 99.7 per cent of the world's population) according to their levels of peacefulness. In the past decade, the GPI has presented trends of increased global violence and less peacefulness.
The GPI (Global Peace Index) is developed in consultation with an international panel of peace experts from peace institutes and think tanks with data collected by the Economist Intelligence Unit. The Index was first launched in 2007, with subsequent reports being released annually. In 2015 it ranked 165 countries, up from 121 in 2007. The study was conceived by Australian technology entrepreneur Steve Killelea, and is endorsed by individuals such as former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, the Dalai Lama, and 2008 Nobel Peace Prize laureate Martti Ahtisaari. The updated index is released each year at events in London, Washington, D.C., and at the United Nations Secretariat in New York City.
The 2024 GPI indicates Iceland, Ireland, Austria, New Zealand, Singapore, Switzerland, Portugal, Denmark, Slovenia, Malaysia and Canada to be the most peaceful countries, while Yemen, Sudan, South Sudan, Afghanistan, Ukraine, Congo, Russia, Syria, Israel and Mali to be the least peaceful. Among the top 7 most populous nations accounting for over half of the world's population and approximately half of the total GDP of the world, Indonesia ranks 48th overall on the Global Peace Index, China 88th, India 116th, Brazil 131st, the United States 132nd, Pakistan 140th and Nigeria 147th. Findings of the 2024 GPI indicate a 6 per cent deterioration in the global level of peace over the preceding 16 years and a growing inequality in peace between the most and least peaceful countries.
Ten indicators broadly assess what might be described as safety and security in society. Their assertion is that low crime rates, minimal incidences of terrorist acts and violent demonstrations, harmonious relations with neighbouring countries, a stable political scene, and a small proportion of the population being internally displaced or refugees can be suggestive of peacefulness.


== Indicators of peacefulness ==
In 2017, 23 indicators were used to establish peacefulness scores for each country. The indicators were originally selected with the assistance of an expert panel in 2007 and are reviewed by the expert panel on an annual basis. The scores for each indicator are normalised on a scale of 1–5, whereby qualitative indicators are banded into five groupings, and quantitative ones are scored from 1–5, to the third decimal point. A table of the indicators is below. In the table, UCDP stands for the Uppsala Conflict Data Program maintained by the University of Uppsala in Sweden, EIU for The Economist Intelligence Unit, UNSCT for the United Nations Survey of Criminal Trends and Operations of Criminal Justice Systems, ICPS is the International Centre for Prison Studies at King's College London, IISS for the International Institute for Strategic Studies publication The Military Balance, and SIPRI for the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute Arms Transfers Database.

Indicators not already ranked on a 1 to 5 scale were converted by using the following formula: x = [x - min(x)] / [max(x) - min(x)], where max(x) and min(x) are the highest and lowest values for that indicator of the countries ranked in the index. The 0 to 1 scores that resulted were then converted to the 1 to 5 scale. Individual indicators were then weighted according to the expert panel's judgment of their importance. The scores were then tabulated into two weighted sub-indices: internal peace, weighted at 60% of a country's final score, and external peace, weighted at 40% of a country's final score. "Negative Peace", defined as the absence of violence or of the fear of violence, is used as the definition of peace to create the Global Peace Index. An additional aim of the GPI database is to facilitate deeper study of the concept of positive peace, or those attitudes, institutions, and structures that drive peacefulness in society. The GPI also examines relationships between peace and reliable international measures, including democracy and transparency, education and material well-being. As such, it seeks to understand the relative importance of a range of potential determinants, or "drivers", which may influence the nurturing of peaceful societies, both internally and externally.
Statistical analysis is applied to GPI data to uncover specific conditions conducive of peace. Researchers have determined that Positive Peace, which includes the attitudes, institutions, and structures that pre-empt conflict and facilitate functional societies, is the main driver of peace. The eight pillars of positive peace are well-functioning government, sound business environment, acceptance of the rights of others, good relations with neighbours, free flow of information, high levels of human capital, low levels of corruption, and equitable distribution of resources. Well-functioning government, low levels of corruption, acceptance of the rights of others, and good relations with neighbours are more important in countries suffering from high levels of violence. Free flow of information and sound business environment become more important when a country is approaching the global average level of peacefulness, also described as the Mid-Peace level. Low levels of corruption is the only Pillar that is strongly significant across all three levels of peacefulness. This suggests it is an important transformational factor at all stages of a nation's development.


== Global Peace Index ranking ==
 
Legend

Note: The GPI's methodology is updated regularly and is improved to reflect the most up-to-date datasets. Each year's GPI report includes a detailed description of the methodology used. Also, the data is revised periodically and so values from previous years may change accordingly.These tables contain the scores and ranking published in the official annual reports. The latest revised data can be found at Vision of Humanity's Interactive world map of the Global Peace Index Archived 2022-07-16 at the Wayback Machine.


== Responses ==

The Index has received endorsements as a political project from a number of major international figures, including the former Secretary-General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan; former President of Finland and 2008 Nobel Peace Prize laureate Martti Ahtisaari; the 14th Dalai Lama; Archbishop Desmond Tutu; Muhammad Yunus; and former United States President Jimmy Carter.
Jeffrey Sachs at Columbia University said: "The GPI continues its pioneering work in drawing the world's attention to the massive resources we are squandering in violence and conflict." Some at Australian National University say that the GPI report presents "the latest and most comprehensive global data on trends in peace, violence and war" and "provides the world's best analysis of the statistical factors associated with long-term peace, as well as economic analysis on the macroeconomic impacts of everyday violence and war on the global economy."
According to The Economist, the weighting of military expenditure "may seem to give heart to freeloaders: countries that enjoy peace precisely because others (often the USA) care for their defence". The Global Peace Index has been criticized for not including indicators specifically relating to violence against women and children. The impact of Global Peace Index has been lower on the academic study of war and peace than on international organizations.


== Previous reports ==
"Reports Institute for Economics and Peace". Institute for Economics & Peace. Feb 6, 2024.
Institute for Economics and Peace (2023). Global Peace Index 2023 (PDF). Institute for Economics & Peace. ISBN 978-0-6451494-9-4.
"Global Peace Index 2021 Summary & Findings". Vision of Humanity. Oct 13, 2021.
Chalabi, Mona (Jun 11, 2013). "Global peace index 2013: the full list". the Guardian.
Rogers, Simon (May 25, 2011). "Global peace index 2011: the full list". the Guardian.
"Global Peace Index 2009" (PDF).


== See also ==

Appeasement
Global Militarisation Index
Global Terrorism Index
Human Development Index
Institute for Economics and Peace
Steve Killelea
United Kingdom Peace Index
United States Peace Index
World Happiness Report
World peace
Interactive model of democratic peace


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Vision of Humanity – Global Peace Index Site Archived 2018-02-24 at the Wayback Machine
Institute for Economics and Peace Archived 2023-07-05 at the Wayback Machine
Interactive world map of the Global Peace Index Archived 2022-07-16 at the Wayback Machine
Integrated Research Archived 2023-08-30 at the Wayback Machine Steve Killelea is the founder of technology company Integrated Research
Uppsala Conflict Data Program, an organized violence database
Global Peace Index 2013: The Full List Archived 2023-03-13 at the Wayback Machine
List of safest countries by Global Peace Index
Vision of Humanity – Global Peace Index Site Archived 2024-6-12 at the Wayback Machine