Ilo Ilo (Chinese: 爸媽不在家; literally: "Mom and Dad Are Not Home") is a 2013 Singaporean drama film. The debut feature of director Anthony Chen, the film features an international cast, including Singaporean actor Chen Tianwen, Malaysian actress Yeo Yann Yann, Filipino actress Angeli Bayani, and debut of child actor Koh Jia Ler.
Ilo Ilo premiered at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival as part of the Directors' Fortnight on 19 May 2013. At the festival, the film was awarded the Caméra d'Or award, thus becoming the first Singaporean feature film to win an award at the Cannes Film Festival. The film was selected as the Singaporean entry for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 86th Academy Awards but was not nominated.


== Plot ==
In Singapore during the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the Lim family welcomes their Filipina domestic helper, Teresa (colloquially Terry), who like many other Filipinas has come in search of a better life. The father, Teck, works in sales for a glass company; the pregnant mother, Hwee Leng, works as a secretary in a downsizing shipping company; and the ten-year-old son, Jiale, is a troubled delinquent. At first, Jiale and Terry exhibit a troubled relationship. Tensions between them rise, resulting in Jiale one day climbing over the school fence at dismissal time just to avoid his maid, who comes every day to fetch him.
When Teck loses his sales job, he conceals it from his wife. Desperate, he accepts a temporary job as a security guard monitoring an egg farm, but was quickly fired for breaking several crates while chasing a robber. As he continues to lose money in the stock market, he acknowledges their losses to his wife, who lambastes him. Meanwhile, Jiale and Terry begin to kindle a relationship, sparking his mother's jealousy and feelings of emotional neglect by her son. Hwee Leng attends a motivational seminar, where she is moved by the optimistic words of the speaker and purchases his merchandise; he turns out to be a fraud.
Jiale shows high intellect in his obsessive calculation of past-winning lottery numbers, which he catalogues in his schoolbook. One day, after being taunted by another boy that Terry only loves him as part of her job, he pushes the boy against a bathroom wall, hospitalizing him. Threatened with expulsion and the school's administration unable to contact his parents, Terry arrives to plead for mercy on his behalf. Hwee Leng shows up, reminding Terry that she is Jiale's mother. Later, Jiale is caned in front of the school assembly.
After the family car is sold for scrap and Teck is fired from his job for committing a mistake, the Lim family acknowledge they can no longer afford to keep Terry employed. Desperate to keep her, Jiale uses his savings to purchase lottery tickets but loses. He becomes despondent, cutting a lock of Terry's hair during a tense farewell. Holding onto her cassette player, Jiale listens to Terry's favorite song, "Kahapon at Pag-ibig" by Asin, with his father in the hospital as Hwee Leng gives birth to a baby girl.


== Cast ==
Chen Tianwen as Teck, the father
Yeo Yann Yann as Hwee Leng, the mother
Koh Jia Ler as Jiale
Angeli Bayani as Teresa “Terry”


== Production ==
Partially funded by Ngee Ann Polytechnic and the Singapore Film Commission, the film's budget is estimated to be around S$700,000.
Koh was caned several times in two takes while shooting a scene.


== Reception ==
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 100% based on 45 reviews, with an average rating of 8.0/10. The website's critics consensus reads, "Quietly compassionate and rich in detail, Ilo Ilo is a strikingly mature debut from writer-director Anthony Chen." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 85 out of 100, based on 12 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".
Ilo Ilo received positive reviews at the Cannes Film Festival. The film was later awarded the Camera d'Or award, an award which recognizes the best debut feature film in the competition. It received six nominations at the Golden Horse Film Festival and Awards and won four: Best Film, Best New Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Supporting Actress for Yeo Yann Yann.


== Awards ==


=== Film ===
May 2013, Caméra d'Or, Cannes Film Festival (Cannes, France)
Sep 2013, Best Feature, 11th Pacific Meridian Film Festival (Vladivostok, Russia)
Sep 2013, NETPAC Prize, 11th Pacific Meridian Film Festival (Vladivostok, Russia)
Sep 2013, Grand Jury Prize, 10th Jameson Cinefest (Miskolc, Hungary)
Sep 2013, FIPRESCI Prize, 10th Jameson Cinefest (Miskolc, Hungary)
Sep 2013, International Ecumenical Jury Prize, 10th Jameson Cinefest (Miskolc, Hungary)
Oct 2013, Best Narrative Feature Film, 22nd Philadelphia Film Festival (Philadelphia, United States)
Oct 2013, First Feature "Sutherland Award", 57th British Film Institute London Film Festival (London, United Kingdom)
Oct 2013, Best Feature Film, Molodist Film Festival (Kyiv, Ukraine)
Oct 2013, FIPRESCI Prize, Molodist Film Festival (Kyiv, Ukraine)
Nov 2013, New Talent Award, Hong Kong Asian Film Festival (Hong Kong)
Nov 2013, Best Film, 50th Golden Horse Awards (Taipei)
Nov 2013, Piaget Best Screenplay Award (Special Award), 50th Golden Horse Awards (Taipei)
Dec 2013, Audience Award, Tokyo Filmex Film Festival (Tokyo, Japan)
Dec 2013, Best Film, Muhr AsiaAfrica Feature section, Dubai International Film Festival (Dubai, UAE)


=== Individual ===
Sep 2013, Best Actress (Yeo Yann Yann), 11th Pacific Meridian Film Festival (Vladivostok, Russia)
Sep 2013, Best Actor (Koh Jia Ler), 9th Eurasia Film Festival, (Almaty, Kazakhstan)
Oct 2013, Best Actress (Yeo Yann Yann), 15th Mumbai International Film Festival (Mumbai, India)
Oct 2013, Best Director (Anthony Chen), 15th Mumbai International Film Festival (Mumbai, India)
Nov 2013, Best Supporting Actress (Yeo Yann Yann), 50th Golden Horse Awards (Taipei, Taiwan)
Nov 2013, Best New Director (Anthony Chen), 50th Golden Horse Awards (Taipei, Taiwan)
Nov 2013, Best Original Screenplay (Anthony Chen), 50th Golden Horse Awards (Taipei, Taiwan)
Dec 2013, Best Director (Anthony Chen), 7th Asia Pacific Screen Awards (Brisbane, Australia)
Dec 2013, Best Supporting Actress (Yeo Yann Yann), Asia Pacific Film Festival (Macau)
Dec 2013, Best Actress (Yeo Yann Yann), Muhr AsiaAfrica Feature section, Dubai Film Festival (Dubai, UAE)


== See also ==
List of submissions to the 86th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film
List of Singaporean submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Ilo Ilo at IMDb
Ilo Ilo at Rotten Tomatoes