Mitsubishi Electric Corporation (三菱電機株式会社, Mitsubishi Denki kabushikigaisha; formerly branded as メルコ, MELCO) is a Japanese multinational electronics (appliances & consumer electronics) and electrical equipment manufacturing company headquartered in Tokyo, Japan. The company was established in 1921 as a spin-off from the electrical machinery manufacturing division of Mitsubishi Shipbuilding (Mitsubishi Heavy Industries) at the Kobe Shipyard. 
A member of the Mitsubishi Group, Mitsubishi Electric produces elevators and escalators, high-end home appliances, air conditioning, factory automation systems, train systems, electric motors, pumps, semiconductors, digital signage, and satellites.


== History ==
Mitsubishi Electric was established as a spin-off from the Mitsubishi Group's other core company Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, then Mitsubishi Shipbuilding, as the latter divested a marine electric motor factory in Kobe, Nagasaki. It has since diversified to become the major electronics company.
Mitsubishi Electric held the record for the fastest elevator in the world, in the 70-story Yokohama Landmark Tower, from 1993 to 2005.
The company acquired Nihon Kentetsu, a Japanese home appliance manufacturer, in 2005.
In 2015 the company acquired DeLclima, an Italian company that designs and produces HVAC and HPAC units, renamed Mitsubishi Electric Hydronics & IT Cooling Systems SpA in 2017.
In early 2020, Mitsubishi Electric was identified as a victim of the year-long cyberattacks perpetrated by the Chinese hackers.
In 2023, Mitsubishi Electric announced its plans to spend 100 billion yen to build a new semiconductor factory in Kumamoto Prefecture, with a target date of April 2026 to begin production.


== Products ==

In 2023, the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)’s Annual PCT Review ranked Mitsubishi Electric's number of patent applications published under the PCT System as 4th in the world, with 2,152 patent applications being published during 2023.
Some product lines of Mitsubishi Electric, such as air conditioners, overlap with the products from Mitsubishi Heavy Industries partly because the companies share the same root.

Air conditioning systems
Room air conditioners (marketed as Mitsubishi Mr. Slim Room Air Conditioner and Mitsubishi Kirigamine)
Package air conditioners (Marketed as Mitsubishi Mr. Slim Packaged Air Conditioner)
Variable refrigerant flow (VRF) systems (marketed as Mitsubishi CITY MULTI)
EcoCute (marketed as Ecodan or DIAHOT)
Ventilators
Air curtains
Air conducting fan
Home appliances
Refrigerators and freezers
Air purifiers, dehumidifiers
Vacuum cleaners, electric fans
Rice cookers, toasters
Building systems
Elevators, escalators
Moving walks
High-speed hand dryers (marketed as Mitsubishi Jet Towel)
Information and communications systems
Data transmission system solutions
SCOPO, the world's first transmission at 10 Gbit/s between relay equipment boards set at a distance of 500 millimetres (20 in) apart
Saffron Type System, an anti-aliased text-rendering engine, developed by Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
Optical access systems
Satellite communications
Factory automation systems
Programmable controllers
AC servo systems, inverters
Industrial and collaborative robots, processing machines
Energy systems
Power generation systems
ITER nuclear fusion reactor
Photovoltaic panels
Transmission and distribution systems
Medium & low-voltage switchgear and systems
Power information & communication technology
Semiconductors and devices
Power modules, high-power devices
Driver ICs
Sensors (Contact image sensors, etc.)
High-frequency devices
optical devices
TFT-LCD modules
Transportation systems
Rolling stock systems
Power supply and electrification systems
Transportation planning and control systems
Communication systems
Automotive equipment
Charging and starting products
Electrification products (Electric power steering system products, safety and driving assistance system products, etc.)
Car multimedia products
Visual information systems
Large-scale LED displays
Diamond Vision, large-scale video displays for sports venues and commercial applications
Multimedia projectors
Printers
Space systems
Satellite programs, platforms, and components
Optical and radio telescopes
Mobile Mapping System, a high-precision GPS mobile measurement system
Public systems
Applied superconductor systems
Doppler lidar, radar systems
Active electronically scanned array radar systems for the Mitsubishi F-2 fighter
Uninterruptible power supply
Water treatment systems, water pumps


== Discontinued products ==
Mobile phones, from 1999 to 2008. Created for NTT Docomo. Mitsubishi Electric quit the mobile phone business in Apr 2008 after decrease in shipments. They estimated a temporary loss of 17 billion Yen in income before income taxes.
Video Cassette Recorders known as the Mitsubishi Black Diamond VCR. Started production around 1978 and ended around 2006.
DVD Players, starting around 1998 and ending around 2006.
Televisions
Large-screen HDTVs. Competitors in the U.S. market were Sony, Pioneer, Panasonic, JVC, Samsung (Akai), Daewoo, LG (Zenith), and Apex Digital.
Direct-view CRT televisions and monitors, including Diamond Views and Diamondtrons, from 1953 until 2001. The last notable size in this field was a 40" (diagonal) tube size.
LCD TVs, starting in 2004 and ending in 2024.
DLP High Definition TVs, until December, 2012. Mitsubishi Electric then focused on professional and home theater DLP projection applications, and is no longer manufacturing televisions for the consumer market.
Computer memory. Business unit spun off to be part of Elpida Memory.
Computers, including Mitsubishi Electric mainframe computers, personal computer(Multi8, Multi16) and MSX home computersfrom 1978 to around 1994.
System LSIs. Business unit spun off to be part of Renesas Technology.
Popular music. Mitsubishi Electric previously marketed popular music via record company Nippon Crown, which had been spun off from then-Nissan Group-owned Nippon Columbia on September 15, 1963. it was sold to Daiichi Kosho Company in July, 2001.
Particle Beam Treatment System, until 2017. Business sold to Hitachi.


== Global operations ==

As of 2013, Mitsubishi Electric's business network around the world were the following:

Mitsubishi Electric Global
Mitsubishi Electric - North America
Canada
United States - Mitsubishi Electric United States
Mitsubishi Electric Asia-Pacific
Australia / New Zealand
China
Hong Kong
India
Taiwan
Vietnam
Japan
There are 11 facilities and 2 laboratories, for example, Kobe, Amagasaki and Kamakura.
Malaysia
Singapore
Thailand
Philippines
Saudi Arabia - Mitsubishi Electric Saudi Ltd. (MELSA)
Mitsubishi Electric Europe
Benelux
France
Germany
Ireland
Italy
Portugal
Russia
Spain
Sweden / Denmark
Finland / Norway
United Kingdom
Turkey


== Slogans ==

With you today and tomorrow (今日もあなたと共に; 1962–1968, in Japan only)
Advanced and ever advancing Mitsubishi Electric (未来を開発する三菱電機; 1968–1985 in Japan, 1968–2001 outside Japan)
SOCIO-TECH: enhancing lifestyles through technology (技術がつくる高度なふれあい SOCIO-TECH; 1985–2001 in Japan. The "Blue MITSUBISHI" logo was introduced for use in Japan.)
Changes for the Better (since 2001)


== Sports ==
Until September 2016, the company had a corporate team which is now known as the Nagoya Diamond Dolphins. Mitsubishi continues to sponsor the team.
Mitsubishi Electric signed a title sponsorship deal with the AFF Championship (renaming the competition as the AFF Mitsubishi Electric Cup) from the 2022 edition onwards.


== See also ==

List of elevator manufacturers
J/FPS-5


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website