The University of Manchester is a public research university in Manchester, England. The main campus is south of Manchester City Centre on Oxford Road. The university is considered a red brick university, a product of the civic university movement of the late 19th century. The current University of Manchester was formed in 2004 following the merger of the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST) and the Victoria University of Manchester. This followed a century of the two institutions working closely with one another.
UMIST had its origins in the Manchester Mechanics' Institution, which was founded in 1824. The present University of Manchester considers this date, which is also the date of foundation of the ancestor of the Royal School of Medicine and Surgery, one of the predecessor institutions of the Victoria University of Manchester, as its official foundation year. The founders of the Mechanics' Institution believed that all professions, to some extent, depended on science. As such, the institute taught working individuals branches of science relevant to their existing occupations, believing its practical application would encourage innovation and advancements within those fields. The Victoria University of Manchester was founded in 1851, as Owens College. Academic research undertaken by the university was published via the Manchester University Press from 1904.
Manchester is the third-largest university in the United Kingdom by total enrolment and receives over 92,000 undergraduate applications per year, making it the most popular university in the UK by volume of applications. The University of Manchester is a member of the Russell Group, the N8 Group, and the US-based Universities Research Association. Additionally, the university owns and operates major cultural assets such as the Manchester Museum, the Whitworth art gallery, the John Rylands Library, the Tabley House Collection and the Jodrell Bank Observatory – a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The university and its predecessor institutions have had 26 Nobel laureates amongst their past and present students and staff.


== History ==


=== Origins (1824 to 2004) ===

The University of Manchester traces its roots to the formation of the Mechanics' Institution (the distant forerunner of UMIST) in 1824, and its heritage is linked to Manchester's pride in being the world's first industrial city. The English chemist John Dalton, together with Manchester businessmen and industrialists, established the Mechanics' Institution to ensure that workers could learn the basic principles of science.
John Owens, a textile merchant, left a bequest of £96,942 in 1846 (around £5.6 million in 2005 prices) to found a college to educate men on non-sectarian lines. His trustees established Owens College in 1851 in a house on the corner of Quay Street and Byrom Street which had been the home of the philanthropist Richard Cobden, and subsequently housed Manchester County Court. The locomotive designer Charles Beyer became a governor of the college and was the largest single donor to the college extension fund, which raised the money to move to a new site and construct the main building now known as the John Owens building. He also campaigned and helped fund the engineering chair, the first applied science department in the north of England. His bequest to the college was the equivalent of £10 million in 1876, at a time when it was in great financial difficulty. Beyer funded the total cost of construction of the Beyer Building to house the biology and geology departments. His will also funded Engineering chairs and the Beyer Professor of Applied mathematics.
The university has a rich German heritage. The Owens College Extension Movement formed its plans after a tour of mainly German universities and polytechnics. A Manchester mill owner, Thomas Ashton, chairman of the extension movement, had studied at Heidelberg University. Sir Henry Roscoe also studied at Heidelberg under Robert Bunsen and they collaborated for many years on research projects. Roscoe promoted the German style of research-led teaching that became the role model for the red-brick universities. Charles Beyer studied at Dresden Academy Polytechnic. There were many Germans on the staff, including Carl Schorlemmer, Britain's first chair in organic chemistry, and Arthur Schuster, professor of physics. There was even a German church nearby (part of the current campus).
In 1873, Owens College moved to new premises on Oxford Road, Chorlton-on-Medlock, and from 1880 it was a constituent college of the federal Victoria University. This university was established and granted a royal charter in 1880, becoming England's first civic university; following Liverpool and Leeds becoming independent, it was renamed the Victoria University of Manchester in 1903 and absorbed Owens College the following year.
By 1905, the two institutions were large and active forces. The Municipal College of Technology, forerunner of UMIST, was the Victoria University of Manchester's Faculty of Technology while continuing in parallel as a technical college offering advanced courses of study. Although UMIST achieved independent university status in 1955, the universities continued to work together. However, in the late-20th century, formal connections between the university and UMIST diminished and in 1994 most of the remaining institutional ties were severed as new legislation allowed UMIST to become a separate university with powers to award its own degrees. A decade later the development was reversed. The Victoria University of Manchester and the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology agreed to merge into a single institution in March 2003.
Before the merger, Victoria University of Manchester and UMIST had a combined total of 23 Nobel Prize winners amongst their former staff and students, with two further Nobel laureates being subsequently added. Manchester has traditionally been strong in the sciences; it is where the nuclear nature of the atom was discovered by Ernest Rutherford, and the world's first electronic stored-program computer was built at the university. Notable scientists associated with the university include physicists Ernest Rutherford, Osborne Reynolds, Niels Bohr, James Chadwick, Arthur Schuster, Hans Geiger, Ernest Marsden and Balfour Stewart. Contributions in mathematics were made by Paul Erdős, Horace Lamb and Alan Turing. The university has at least as strong a heritage in the humanities and social sciences: major names include William Stanley Jevons and Sir Arthur Lewis in economics; Samuel Alexander, Dorothy Emmet and Alasdair MacIntyre in philosophy, Thomas Tout, Sir Lewis Namier, and A.J.P. Taylor in history; Eugène Vinaver in French, and James Noel Adams in Latin. One of the great polymaths of the twentieth century, Michael Polanyi, was professor of physical chemistry for fifteen years before transferring to a specially created chair of social studies. In addition, the author Anthony Burgess, the Pritzker Prize and RIBA Stirling Prize-winning architect Norman Foster, and the composer Peter Maxwell Davies all attended, or worked at, Manchester.


=== Post-merger (2004 to present) ===

The current University of Manchester was officially launched on 1 October 2004 when Queen Elizabeth II bestowed its royal charter. The university was named the Sunday Times University of the Year in 2006 after winning the inaugural Times Higher Education Supplement award for University of the Year in 2005.
The founding president and vice-chancellor of the new university was Alan Gilbert, former vice-chancellor of the University of Melbourne, who retired at the end of the 2009–2010 academic year. His successor was Dame Nancy Rothwell, who had held a chair in physiology at the university since 1994. Rothwell served as Vice Chancellor from 2010 to 2024 before handing over to Duncan Ivison. The Nancy Rothwell Building was named in her honour. One of the university's aims stated in the Manchester 2015 Agenda is to be one of the top 25 universities in the world, following on from Alan Gilbert's aim to "establish it by 2015 among the 25 strongest research universities in the world on commonly accepted criteria of research excellence and performance". In 2011, four Nobel laureates were on its staff: Andre Geim, Konstantin Novoselov, Sir John Sulston and Joseph E. Stiglitz.
The Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) announced in February 2012 the formation of the National Graphene Institute. The University of Manchester is the "single supplier invited to submit a proposal for funding the new £45m institute, £38m of which will be provided by the government" – (EPSRC & Technology Strategy Board). In 2013, an additional £23 million of funding from European Regional Development Fund was awarded to the institute taking investment to £61 million.
In August 2012, it was announced that the university's Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences had been chosen to be the "hub" location for a new BP International Centre for Advanced Materials, as part of a $100 million initiative to create industry-changing materials. The centre will be aimed at advancing fundamental understanding and use of materials across a variety of oil and gas industrial applications and will be modelled on a hub and spoke structure, with the hub located at Manchester, and the spokes based at the University of Cambridge, Imperial College London, and the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign.
In 2020 the university saw a series of student rent strikes and protests in opposition to the university's handling of the COVID-19 pandemic, rent levels and living conditions in the university's halls of residence. The protests ended with a negotiated rent reduction.
In 2023, a second rent strike and student protest in opposition to the university's rent price and living conditions in the halls of residence started. The protests included occupations, marches and student's withholding their rent in University accommodation. The university's response to the protests included using bailiffs to evict occupiers and taking disciplinary action against some occupiers. Despite outcry from the students, which included a referendum where 97% of students voted for the university to reduce rent prices, the following year the university continued to increase rent prices for its students. Some of the university-owned accommodation increased by up to 10% in rent price, compared to the previous year.


== Campus ==

The university's main site contains most of its facilities and is often referred to as the campus, however Manchester is not a campus university as the concept is commonly understood. It is centrally located in the city and its buildings are integrated into the fabric of Manchester, with non-university buildings and major roads between.
The campus comprises two parts:

North campus or Sackville Street Campus, centred on Sackville Street in Manchester
South campus or Oxford Road Campus, centred on Oxford Road

Student accommodation is located on three residential campuses: the City campus, adjacent to the academic departments; the Fallowfield campus approximately 2 miles (3.2 km) south of the main site; and the Victoria Park campus between the City and Fallowfields campuses.
As of 2025, most of the former North Campus has migrated to the Oxford Road Campus, with the Sackville Street site now home to the SISTER regeneration area (formerly ID Manchester). This is a joint venture between Bruntwood SciTech and the University of Manchester, set to become a £1.7 billion innovation district and new city centre neighbourhood. The Manchester City Council Strategic Regeneration Framework for the site was approved in 2017, and updated in 2023.


=== Old Quadrangle ===

The buildings around the Old Quadrangle date from the time of Owens College, and were designed in a Gothic style by Alfred Waterhouse. The first to be built was the John Owens Building (1873), formerly the Main Building; the others were added over the next thirty years. These include the Beyer Building (1887), the Manchester Museum (1887), the Christie Library (1898) and Whitworth Hall (1902), which is used for the university's graduations.


=== Other notable buildings ===
The University of Manchester estate includes over 30 listed buildings. Besides the buildings around the Old Quadrangle, other notable buildings on the Oxford Road Campus include the Stephen Joseph Studio, a former German Protestant church, and the Samuel Alexander Building, a grade II listed building erected in 1919 and home of the School of Arts, Languages and Cultures.
Notable buildings on the Sackville Street Campus include the Sackville Street Building, formerly the UMIST Main Building, which was opened in 1902 by the then Prime Minister, Arthur Balfour. Built using Burmantofts terracotta, the building is now Grade II listed. It was extended along Whitworth Street, towards London Road, between 1927 and 1957 by the architects Bradshaw Gass & Hope, completion being delayed due to the depression in the 1930s and the Second World War.


=== Cultural institutions ===
The university's Jodrell Bank Observatory in Cheshire is a World Heritage Site and home to the 76-m Lovell Telescope. Other cultural institutions at the university include the John Rylands Research Institute and Library, the Whitworth art gallery and the Manchester Museum. The special collections at the John Rylands Library, and the entire collections at the Whitworth and the Manchester Museum are designated under the Arts Council England's Designation Scheme as being among the "pre-eminent collections held in museums, libraries and archives across England".


== Organisation and administration ==


=== Faculties and schools ===
The University of Manchester is divided into three faculties: biology, medicine and health; science and engineering; and humanities.


==== Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health ====

The faculty is divided into the School of Biological Sciences, the School of Medical Sciences and the School of Health Sciences.
Biological sciences have been taught at Manchester as far back as the foundation of Owens College in 1851. At UMIST, biological teaching and research began in 1959, with the creation of a biochemistry department. The present school, though unitary for teaching, is divided into a number of sections for research purposes.
The medical college was established in 1874 and is one of the largest in the country, with more than 400 medical students trained in each clinical year and more than 350 students in the pre-clinical/phase 1 years. The university is a founding partner of the Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, established to focus high-end healthcare research in Greater Manchester.
In 1883, a department of pharmacy was established at the university and, in 1904, Manchester became the first British university to offer an honours degree in the subject. The School of Pharmacy benefits from links with Manchester Royal Infirmary and UHSM/ Wythenshawe and Salford Royal (formally known as Hope) hospitals providing its undergraduate students with hospital experience.
The School of Psychological Sciences was one of the five schools which make up the Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences. The Victoria University of Manchester was the first university in Britain to appoint a full-time Professor of Psychology in 1919. In 2004, when the University of Manchester was formed, the school brought together the Human Communication and Deafness Group (HCD) in the Department of Psychology and the Division of Clinical Psychology.  The school was divided into three divisions: Psychology, Clinical Psychology, Audiology & Deafness. T. H. Pear was Professor of Psychology from 1919 to 1951.


==== Faculty of Science and Engineering ====

The Faculty of Science and Engineering is divided into two schools. The School of Engineering comprises the departments of: chemical engineering and analytical science; computer science; electrical and electronic engineering; and mechanical, aerospace and civil engineering. The School of Natural Sciences comprises the departments of: chemistry; earth and environmental sciences; physics and astronomy; materials; and mathematics.
The Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics comprises the university's astronomical academic staff in Manchester and Jodrell Bank Observatory on rural land near Goostrey, about ten miles (16 km) west of Macclesfield. The observatory's Lovell Telescope is named after Sir Bernard Lovell, a professor at the Victoria University of Manchester who first proposed the telescope. Constructed in the 1950s, it is the third largest fully movable radio telescope in the world.


==== Faculty of Humanities ====
The Faculty of Humanities is home to four schools:

The School of Arts, Languages and Cultures (SALC), incorporating Archaeology; Art History & Visual Studies; Classics and Ancient History; Drama; English and American Studies; History; Linguistics; Modern Languages; Museology; Music; Religions and Theology, and the University Language Centre.
The School of Environment, Education and Development (SEED), incorporating Geography, Development, Planning, Property, Environmental Management, the Manchester Institute of Education, and the Manchester School of Architecture, which is administered in conjunction with Manchester Metropolitan University.
The School of Social Sciences (SoSS), incorporating Law, Criminology, Economics, Politics, Sociology, Philosophy, Social Anthropology, and Social Statistics.
Alliance Manchester Business School
Additionally, the faculty comprises a number of research institutes: the Centre for New Writing, the Institute for Social Change, the Brooks World Poverty Institute, Humanitarian and Conflict Response Institute, the Manchester Institute for Innovation Research, the Research Institute for Cosmopolitan Cultures, the Centre for Chinese Studies, the Institute for Development Policy and Management, the Centre for Equity in Education and the Sustainable Consumption Institute.


=== Professional services ===
A number of professional services, organised as "directorates", support the university. These include: Directorate of Compliance and Risk, Directorate of Estates and Facilities, Directorate of Finance, Directorate of Planning, Directorate of Human Resources, Directorate of IT Services, Directorate of Legal Affairs and Board Secretariat and Governance Office, Directorate of Research and Business Engagement, Directorate for the Student Experience, Division of Communications and Marketing, Division of Development and Alumni Relations, Office for Social Responsibility and the University Library. Additionally, professional services staff are found within the faculty structure, in such roles as technician and experimental officer.
Each directorate reports to the registrar, secretary and chief operating officer, who in turn reports to the president of the university. There is also a director of faculty operations in each faculty, overseeing support for these areas.


=== Finances ===
In the financial year ending 31 July 2024, the University of Manchester had a total income of £1.365 billion (2022/23 – £1.346 billion) and total expenditure of £1.025 billion (2022/23 – £1.239 billion). Key sources of income included £714.3 million from tuition fees and education contracts (2022/23 – £659.9 million), £151.0 million from funding body grants (2022/23 – £184.2 million), £287.9 million from research grants and contracts (2022/23 – £271.1 million), 31.2 million from investment income (2022/23 – 17.4 million) and £8.3 million from donations and endowments (2022/23 – £18.6 million).
At year end, Manchester had endowments of £240.2 million (2023 – £221.6 million) and total net assets of £2.215 billion (2023 – £1.870 billion). It holds the seventh-largest endowment of any university in the UK.


== Academic profile ==
The University of Manchester is the 3rd largest university in the UK (following The Open University and University College London). The University of Manchester attracts international students from 160 countries around the world.
Well-known members of the university's current academic staff include computer scientist Steve Furber, economist Richard Nelson, novelist Jeanette Winterson, and physicist Brian Cox.


=== Research ===
The University of Manchester is a major centre for research and a member of the Russell Group of leading British research universities. In the 2021 Research Excellence Framework, the university was ranked fifth in the UK in terms of research power and eighth for grade point average quality of staff submitted among multi-faculty institutions (tenth when including specialist institutions). In the 2014 Research Excellence Framework, the university was ranked fifth in the UK in terms of research power and fifteenth for grade point average quality of staff submitted among multi-faculty institutions (seventeenth when including specialist institutions). Manchester has the sixth largest research income of any English university (after Oxford, University College London (UCL), Cambridge, Imperial and King's College London), and has been informally referred to as part of a "golden diamond" of research-intensive UK institutions (adding Manchester to the Oxford–Cambridge–London "Golden Triangle"). Manchester has a strong record in terms of securing funding from the three main UK research councils, EPSRC, Medical Research Council (MRC) and Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), being ranked fifth, seventh and first respectively. In addition, the university is one of the richest in the UK in terms of income and interest from endowments: an estimate in 2008 placed it third, surpassed only by Oxford and Cambridge.
The University of Manchester has attracted the most research income from UK industry of any institution in the country. The figures, from the Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA), show that Manchester attracted £24,831,000 of research income in 2016–2017 from UK industry, commerce and public corporations.
Historically, Manchester has been linked with high scientific achievement: the university and its constituent former institutions combined count 25 Nobel laureates among their past and current students and staff, the fourth largest number of any single university in the United Kingdom (after Oxford, Cambridge and UCL) and the ninth largest of any university in Europe. Furthermore, according to an academic poll two of the top ten discoveries by university academics and researchers were made at the university (namely the first working computer and the contraceptive pill).  The Langworthy Professorship, an endowed chair at the university's Department of Physics and Astronomy, has been historically given to a long line of academic luminaries, including Ernest Rutherford (1907–19), Lawrence Bragg (1919–37), Patrick Blackett (1937–53) and more recently Konstantin Novoselov, all of whom have won the Nobel Prize. In 2013, Andre Geim was given the Regius Professorship in Physics, the only one of its kind in the UK.
The university has established joint research funds with leading universities to support a range of research initiatives. For instance, between 2021 and 2023, it partnered with the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm University, and Tel Aviv University on research projects in medicine, biology, natural sciences, and engineering.


=== Libraries ===

The University of Manchester Library is the largest non-legal deposit library in the UK and the third-largest academic library after those of Oxford and Cambridge. It has the largest collection of electronic resources of any library in the UK.
The John Rylands Library, founded in memory of John Rylands by his wife Enriqueta Augustina Rylands as an independent institution, is situated in a Victorian Gothic building on Deansgate, in the city centre. It houses an important collection of historic books and other printed materials, manuscripts, including archives and papyri. The papyri are in ancient languages and include the oldest extant New Testament document, Rylands Library Papyrus P52, commonly known as the St John Fragment. In April 2007 the Deansgate site reopened to readers and the public after major improvements and renovations, including the construction of the pitched roof originally intended and a new wing.


=== Collections ===


==== Manchester Museum ====

The Manchester Museum holds nearly 4.25 million items sourced from many parts of the world. The collections include butterflies and carvings from India, birds and bark-cloth from the Pacific, live frogs and ancient pottery from America, fossils and native art from Australia, mammals and ancient Egyptian craftsmanship from Africa, plants, coins and minerals from Europe, art from past civilisations of the Mediterranean, and beetles, armour and archery from Asia. In November 2004, the museum acquired a cast of a fossilised Tyrannosaurus rex called "Stan".
The museum's first collections were assembled in 1821 by the Manchester Society of Natural History, and subsequently expanded by the addition of the collections of Manchester Geological Society. Due to the society's financial difficulties and on the advice of evolutionary biologist Thomas Huxley, Owens College accepted responsibility for the collections in 1867. The college commissioned Alfred Waterhouse, architect of London's Natural History Museum, to design a museum on a site in Oxford Road to house the collections for the benefit of students and the public. The Manchester Museum was opened to the public in 1888.


==== Whitworth Art Gallery ====

The Whitworth Art Gallery houses collections of internationally known British watercolours, textiles and wallpapers, modern and historic prints, drawings, paintings and sculpture. Its collection contains 31,000 items. A programme of temporary exhibitions runs throughout the year and the Mezzanine Court displays sculpture.
The gallery was founded by Robert Darbishire with a donation from Sir Joseph Whitworth in 1889, as The Whitworth Institute and Park. In 1959, the gallery became part of the Victoria University of Manchester. In October 1995, the Mezzanine Court in the centre of the building was opened. It was designed to display sculptures and won a RIBA regional award.


=== Reputation and rankings ===

The Sunday Times described Manchester in 2006 as having "a formidable reputation spanning most disciplines, but most notably in the life sciences, engineering, humanities, economics, sociology and the social sciences". Manchester was also given an award for excellence and innovation in the arts by the Times Higher Education Awards 2010.
According to The Graduate Market in 2024 published by High Fliers Research, Manchester was the second most targeted university by the top 100 graduate employers in the UK in 2023-24.
In 2025-26, the University of Manchester was ranked 35th in the QS World University Rankings. In 2025, it was ranked joint 53rd by Times Higher Education and 46th by the Shanghai Academic Ranking of World Universities. Nationally, it was ranked 28th in 2025 by the Complete University Guide, while in 2026 it was ranked 36th by The Guardian and 27th by The Times. 
Luke Georgiou, Manchester's deputy president and deputy vice-chancellor, said in 2022 that: "The ranking tables, despite their limitations, give a consistent picture of The University of Manchester’s excellence in national and global terms."


=== Admissions ===

Manchester received 92,500 UCAS main scheme applications for undergraduate courses in 2024. It had the 20th highest average entry qualification for undergraduates of any UK university in 2022, with new students averaging 166 UCAS points, equivalent to 1/4 of a grade below A*A*A* in A-level grades. The university gave offers of admission to 57.7% of its UK-domiciled undergraduate applicants in 2024.
15.7% of Manchester's undergraduates were privately educated in 2019-20, the 23rd highest proportion amongst mainstream British universities. In 2023-24, 18,660 of Manchester's 46,915 students (40%) were from outside the UK in 2023–24, with 9,090 (49% of international students, 19% of all students) coming from China. It was identified by Times Higher Education in 2023 as having the fifth highest proportion of international students from China out of all mainstream universities in the UK.


=== Manchester University Press ===

Manchester University Press is the university's academic publishing house. It publishes academic monographs, textbooks and journals, most of which are works from authors based elsewhere in the international academic community, and is the third-largest university press in England after Oxford University Press and Cambridge University Press.


== Student life ==


=== Students' Union ===

The University of Manchester Students' Union is the representative body of students at the university and the UK's largest students' union. It was formed out of the merger between UMIST Students' Association and University of Manchester Union when the parent organisations UMIST and the Victoria University of Manchester merged on 1 October 2004.
Unlike many other students' unions in the UK, it does not have a president, but is run by an eight-member executive team who share joint responsibility.


=== Sport ===

The University of Manchester operates sports clubs through its athletics union while student societies are operated by the Students' Union.
The university has more than 80 health and fitness classes while over 3,000 students are members of the 44 various Athletic Union clubs. The sports societies vary widely in their level and scope. Many more popular sports operate several university teams and departmental teams which compete in leagues against other teams within the university. Teams include: badminton, lacrosse, korfball, dodgeball, field hockey, ice hockey, rugby league, rugby union, football, basketball, fencing, netball, squash, water polo, ultimate, and cricket.
The athletic union was formed at Owens College in 1885 from four clubs: rugby, lacrosse, cricket and tennis. In 1901 the women's athletic union was founded. In 1981 the two unions were amalgamated. After the acquisition of the Firs estate in Fallowfield a sports ground and pavilion were provided there. From 1940 the McDougall Centre in Burlington Street was also in use as a sports centre. Ron Hill, Rowena Sweatman, James Hickman, Cyril Holmes and Harry Whittle are former students who have achieved Olympic success.
The Manchester Aquatics Centre, the swimming pool used for the Manchester Commonwealth Games is on the campus and used for water sports. The main facilities used for sports are the Sugden Centre in Grosvenor Street, the Armitage Site near Owens Park and the Wythenshawe Sports Ground.
The university has achieved success in the BUCS (British University & College Sports) competitions, with its men's water polo first team winning the national championships (2009, 2010, 2011) under the tutelage of their coach Andy Howard. It was positioned in eighth place in the overall BUCS rankings for 2009/10.
The university competes annually in 28 different sports against Leeds and Liverpool universities in the Christie Cup, which Manchester has won for seven consecutive years. The Christie Cup is an inter-university competition between Liverpool, Leeds and Manchester in numerous sports since 1886. After the Oxford and Cambridge rivalry, the Christie's Championships is the oldest Inter–University competition on the sporting calendar: the cup was a benefaction of Richard Copley Christie.
Every year elite sportsmen and sportswomen are selected for membership of the XXI Club, a society formed in 1932 to promote sporting excellence at the university. Most members have gained a Full Maroon for representing the university and many have excelled at a British Universities or National level. No more than 21 active members are allowed, each elected for up to three years (after graduating they become passive members).
An example of the university clubs is the lacrosse club which was founded in the season 1883–84 and in the following years won the North of England Flags twice and maintained its position among the leading English clubs. In 1885 it was one of the four founding clubs of the athletic union. The merging of Owens College with the university in 1904 affected the club by restricting the pool of players available for selection. However, when the English Universities Lacrosse Championship was set up in 1925–26 with five university teams the Manchester team won in the first season and again in 1932–33 and continued to do so in the 1930s.


=== University Challenge quiz programme ===
In the eight years up to 2013, Manchester has won the BBC2 quiz programme University Challenge four times, drawing equal with Magdalen College, Oxford, for the highest number of series wins. Since merging as the University of Manchester, the university has consistently reached the latter stages of the competition, progressing to at least the semi-finals in every appearance between 2005 and 2014.
In 2006, Manchester beat Trinity Hall, Cambridge, to record the university's first win in the competition. The next year, the university finished in second place after losing to the University of Warwick in the final. In 2009, the team battled hard in the final against Corpus Christi College, Oxford. At the gong, the score was 275 to 190 in favour of Corpus Christi College after a winning performance from Gail Trimble. However, the title was eventually given to the University of Manchester after it was discovered that Corpus Christi team member Sam Kay had graduated eight months before the final was broadcast, so the team was disqualified.
Manchester reached the semi-finals in the 2010 competition before being beaten by Emmanuel College, Cambridge. The university did not enter the 2011 series for an unknown reason. However, Manchester did enter a year later and won University Challenge 2012. Manchester has since defended its title to win University Challenge 2013, beating University College London, 190 to 140.


=== Student housing ===

Before they merged, the two former universities had for some time been sharing their residential facilities.


==== City Campus ====
Whitworth Park Halls of Residence is owned by the University of Manchester and houses 1,085 students, located next to Whitworth Park. It is notable for its triangular shaped accommodation blocks. Their designer took inspiration from a hill created from excavated soil which had been left in 1962 from an archaeological dig led by John Gater. A consequence of the triangular design was a reduced cost for the construction company. A deal struck between the university and Manchester City Council meant the council would pay for the roofs of all student residential buildings in the area. They were built in the mid-1970s.

The site of the halls was previously occupied by many small streets whose names have been preserved in the names of the halls. Grove House is an older building that has been used by the university for many different purposes over the last sixty years. Its first occupants in 1951 were the Appointments Board and the Manchester University Press. The shops in Thorncliffe Place were part of the same plan and include banks and a convenience store.
Notable people associated with the halls include Friedrich Engels, whose residence is commemorated by a blue plaque on Aberdeen House; the physicist Brian Cox; and Irene Khan, Secretary General of Amnesty International.
The former UMIST Campus has four halls of residence near to Sackville Street building (Weston, Lambert, Fairfield, and Wright Robinson). The Grosvenor Halls of Residence were demolished in 2015 to make way for a new engineering campus. Chandos Hall, a former residence, has been closed and demolished.
Other residences include Vaughn House, once the home of the clergy serving the Church of the Holy Name, and George Kenyon Hall at University Place; Crawford House and Devonshire House adjacent to the Manchester Business School and Victoria Hall on Upper Brook Street.


==== Victoria Park Campus ====

The Victoria Park Campus has several halls of residence including St. Anselm Hall with Canterbury Court, Dalton-Ellis Hall, Hulme Hall (including Burkhardt House) and Opal Gardens Hall. Halls at Victoria Park are generally more traditional, and more likely to be catered.
Hulme Hall, which opened in 1887 in Plymouth Grove, is the oldest hall of residence at the university. It moved to its current site in Victoria Park in 1907.


==== Fallowfield Campus ====
The Fallowfield Campus, 2 miles (3.2 km) south of the Oxford Road Campus is the largest of the university's residential campuses, built largely in the 1960s as a 'Student Village'. The Owens Park group of halls, formerly with a landmark tower, is at its centre, while Oak House is another hall of residence. Woolton Hall is next to Oak House. Allen Hall is a traditional hall near Ashburne Hall (Sheavyn House being annexed to Ashburne). Richmond Park is a recent addition to the campus, as well as Unsworth Park which opened in 2019.


== Notable people ==

Many notable people have worked or studied at the University of Manchester or its predecessor institutions, including 26 Nobel Prize recipients.
Some of the best-known scientists are: John Dalton (founder of modern atomic theory), Ernest Rutherford who proved the nuclear nature of the atom whilst working at Manchester, Ludwig Wittgenstein (considered one of the most significant philosophers of the 20th century), George E. Davis (founder of the discipline of chemical engineering), Alan Turing (influential in theoretical computer science, and notable figure in gay rights history), Marie Stopes (pioneer of birth control and campaigner for women's rights), Bernard Lovell (a pioneer of radio astronomy), Tom Kilburn and Frederic Calland Williams (who developed the Manchester Baby, the world's first stored-program computer), and physicist and television presenter Brian Cox.
Notable politicians and public figures associated with the university include: two current presidents - Michael D Higgins of the Republic of Ireland and Samia Suluhu Hassan of Tanzania - and two current prime ministers - Abdalla Hamdok of Sudan and Gaston Browne of Antigua and Barbuda - as well as several ministers in the United Kingdom, Malaysia, Canada, Hong Kong, and Singapore. This includes the United Kingdom's current Secretary of State for Business and Trade, Jonathan Reynolds. Chaim Weizmann, a senior lecturer at the university, was the first president of Israel. Irene Khan is a former secretary general of Amnesty International.
In the arts, alumni include: the author Anthony Burgess and Robert Bolt (two times Academy Award winner and three times Golden Globe winner), actors including Roger Allam, Benedict Cumberbatch, Toby Jones and Parineeti Chopra. The university also educated some of the leading figures of alternative comedy: Ben Elton, Ade Edmondson and Rik Mayall.


== See also ==
Third-oldest university in England debate


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Jones, Stuart (ed). Manchester Minds: A University History of Ideas (Manchester University Press, 2024)
Powicke, Maurice. "University of Manchester." History Today (May 1951) 1#5 pp 48–55 (online)


== External links ==

Official website