Toussaint Louverture [tusɛ̃ luvɛʁtyʁ] is a 2012 French film written and directed by Philippe Niang. It stars Jimmy Jean-Louis, Aïssa Maïga and Sonia Rolland and is based on the life of Toussaint Louverture.
The film premiered at the 2012 Festival de Luchon. It won the Best Diaspora Feature award at the 8th Africa Movie Academy Awards.


== Cast ==
Jimmy Jean-Louis as Toussaint Louverture
Aïssa Maïga as Suzanne
Arthur Jugnot as Pasquier
Pierre Cassignard as général de division  Étienne Maynaud de Bizefranc de Laveaux
Éric Viellard as Léger-Félicité Sonthonax
Magloire Delcros-Varaud as Mars Plaisir
Féodor Atkine as général de division Marie-François Auguste de Caffarelli du Falga
Ruddy Sylaire as Georges Biassou
Giovanni Grangerac as Infant Hyacinthe Moïse
Yann Ebonge as Hyacinthe Moïse
Thierry Desroses as Henri Christophe
Hubert Koundé as Jean-Jacques Dessalines
Philippe Caroit as Bayon
Sonia Rolland as Marie-Eugénie Sonthonax
Stany Coppet as Brigadier general André Rigaud
Virginie Desarnauts as Catherine Delambre
Alex Martin as  Mulatto officer
Mabô Kouyaté as Placide
Joffrey Platel as général de division Charles Leclerc
Xavier Lemaître as Marquis d'Hermona
Thomas Langmann as Napoleon
Valérie Mairesse as Mother Coulinge
Jessica Geneus as Vertueuse


== Plot summary ==
First part: "The Flight of the Eagle" 
A slave deemed too old and not productive enough by his owner, Toussaint 's father was thrown into the waters of Cap-Français, under the eyes of his own son, then only 8 years old. As an adult, Toussaint (Jimmy Jean-Louis) is employed on the Bréda estate by Bayon de Libertat (Philippe Caroit), who teaches him to read and write. The young man discovers the texts of Abbé Raynal, an Enlightenment philosopher who advocates the abolition of slavery. Toussaint then chooses to abandon his wife Suzanne (Aïssa Maïga) and their two children to become the leader of a group of rebellious slaves. The Spanish troops noticed his military talents and enlisted him in the army which fought against France.
Second part: "The Battle of the Eagles" 
On the eve of the Revolution of 1789, Toussaint Louverture prepares Saint Domingue to free itself from its chains, imposed by French Colonization. Strong in character, steeped in democratic convictions, and then imbued with the brand new values and benefits of the nascent Republic, he allied himself with France after having fought alongside the Spaniards, the English and having refused the Alliance with the States of 'America.
After the betrayal of the Consul Bonaparte (Thomas Langmann), crowned since emperor in December 1804, Santo Domingo takes the name of Haiti, because Toussaint, at the cost of his life, will have made his country the first Independent Negro State from which slavery is finally banished. From his prison at Fort de Joux, he will be the very person who analyzes with hindsight and wisdom his behavior in the face of each situation.


== References ==


== External links ==
Toussaint Louverture at IMDb 
Entire film (English subtitles) on YouTube