"Viva la Vida" (, Spanish: [βiβa la βiða]; Spanish for 'long live life' or 'live life') is a song by British rock band Coldplay. It was written by all members of the band for their fourth album, Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends (2008). The lyrics contain historical and Christian references (King Louis XVI of France and the French Revolution, "Roman cavalry choirs", Saint Peter) and the track is built around a looping string section with a digitally processed piano, while other layers are gradually added.
The track was first made available as part of the album pre-order on 7 May 2008, being released individually on 25 May 2008 as the album's second single. Debuting to critical acclaim and commercial success, "Viva la Vida" reached the top spot of the UK Singles Chart and Billboard Hot 100, becoming the band's first number-one single in both the U.S. and U.K. The song also won the Grammy Award for Song of the Year at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards in 2009.


== Background ==
The song's Spanish title, "Viva la Vida", is taken from a painting by 20th-century Mexican artist Frida Kahlo. In Spanish, viva translates to "long live", so "Long Live Life" is an accurate translation and the painting reflects the artistic irony of acclaiming life while suffering physically. When asked about the album's title, referring to Frida Kahlo's strength, enduring polio, a broken spine, and a decade of chronic pain, lead singer Chris Martin said: "She went through a lot of pain, of course, and then she started a big painting in her house that said 'Viva la Vida', I just loved the boldness of it."
During the album's production, "Viva la Vida" was one of the songs that had polarised each member's opinion over which version they should choose. In an interview, Martin recalled: "We did quite a few different versions and went round the houses a bit and eventually settled on those treatments for it."


== Composition ==

The lyrics to "Viva la Vida" are narrated by a protagonist who says he "used to rule the world". Martin has explained the song lyric "I know Saint Peter won't call my name" in an interview with Q magazine: "It's about ... You're not on the list" to enter the pearly gates. When asked about the song, bassist Guy Berryman said: "It's a story about a king who's lost his kingdom, and all the album's artwork is based on the idea of revolutionaries and guerrillas. There's this slightly anti-authoritarian viewpoint that's crept into some of the lyrics and it's some of the pay-off between being surrounded by governments on one side, but also we're human beings with emotions and we're all going to die and the stupidity of what we have to put up with every day. Hence the album title."
The strings are arranged and conducted by violinist Davide Rossi.


== Release and promotion ==
"Viva la Vida" was first made available on the iTunes Store on 7 May 2008. The song was part of the pre-order marketing for Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends, which also included exclusive acoustic versions for "Lost!" and "Lovers in Japan". On 25 May 2008, Coldplay released it for individual purchase globally. However, since the track was already being given away as a free download to those who had pre-ordered the album, it remained ineligible for the UK Singles Chart until 12 June 2008. Parlophone originally requested the band to not release "Viva la Vida", arguing it "did not sound like Coldplay", but drummer Will Champion insisted on the release.
It became the best-selling song of 2008 on iTunes and was used as part of Apple's iPod + iTunes advertisement campaign. Coldplay first performed "Viva la Vida" live at the MTV Movie Awards. It has since gone on to make many media appearances, including being featured throughout the episode "A Person of Interest" from the paranormal drama Medium, as a song played on the radio in the episode "We're Not in Kansas Anymore" from the teen drama 90210, and on the international soundtrack to the Brazilian soap opera A Favorita which helped push the track up the charts in Brazil, where the telenovela had been shown.
In 2009, Solange Knowles covered "Viva la Vida". Lady Gaga also covered it for BBC Radio 1. Live versions have appeared on the 2009 live album LeftRightLeftRightLeft, the 2012 album Live 2012, and the 2018 album Live in Buenos Aires. It was also used in "Million Dollar Maybe", an episode of The Simpsons. The song was covered in the seventh series of The X Factor by the boyband One Direction in 2010. In 2024, the season 2 finale of Pachinko ends with a cover by Rosé of the Korean pop group Blackpink.


== Music videos ==

The official music video for "Viva la Vida" was directed by Hype Williams and premiered at Coldplay's official website on 1 August 2008, and was later released on 4 August 2008 on YouTube. The video depicts the band performing against a blurry, warped version of Eugène Delacroix's painting La Liberté guidant le peuple, ending with the band members crumbling into rose petals.
A second, alternate video was shot in The Hague, the Netherlands, directed by Anton Corbijn and released alongside the first. This second version is a tribute to Corbijn's video for Depeche Mode's "Enjoy the Silence" and portrays Chris Martin as the king from whose perspective the song is sung. During the video, he carries Delacroix's painting. At the end, he hangs the picture up in a white stall on top of a hill. As he sings the last chorus, his bandmates surface heading his way, tying in loose ends from the "Violet Hill" video.


== Critical reception ==

"Viva la Vida" received widespread critical acclaim. In the Entertainment Weekly review of the album, critic Chris Willman wrote: "Take the title track ... on which [Martin] imagines himself as a paranoid monarch. 'Who would ever want to be king?' Martin asks. 'Revolutionaries wait/For my head on a silver plate!' The confident majesty of the music, however, belies how he and his bandmates  have invigorated their rock-lite reign." Josh Hathaway from The Plain Dealer noted "Viva la Vida" as the "catchiest" song on the album. Chris Jones of the BBC noted: "The string/brass mutations that bolster a track like 'Viva la Vida' ... conjure tunes so sweetly melancholy." In the IGN review, critic Chad Grischow wrote, "It is their one and only foray into unabashed orchestral pop, but the punchy strut of the strings and fantastic marching vocals make it far too charming and lively to dislike, and even harder not to love."
"Viva la Vida" was nominated for "Record of the Year", and won "Song of the Year", and "Best Pop Performance by a Duo or a Group" at the 2009 Grammy Awards. This song also won the Ivor Novello Award for "Best Selling British Single". The song was included in Rolling Stone's annual "100 Best Songs" of 2008 at number nine; it was also voted number two on Rolling Stone's Readers' Rock List: Best Songs of 2008. "Viva la Vida" was also listed at number five on Blender's 1001 Downloads: The Top 144 Songs of 2008, as well in the number eight position on Village Voice's Pazz and Jop list. "Viva la Vida" has been sampled in several other songs, including Flo Rida's "Be on You", Mac Miller's "Cut the Check" featuring Chief Keef and Drake's "Congratulations" from his So Far Gone mixtape. In 2019, Billboard ranked the song number seven on their list of the 50 greatest Coldplay songs. In 2021, American Songwriter placed the song at number one on their own version of the ranking.


=== Rankings ===


== Chart performance ==
Driven by digital sales, "Viva la Vida" became Coldplay's first song to top the Billboard Hot 100 and their second to enter the Top 10, following "Speed of Sound". It was also the first single from a British act to reach number one in the United Kingdom and United States simultaneously since "Maggie May" by Rod Stewart in 1971. The track later peaked at number eight on the Hot 100 Airplay, giving the group their highest-charting release in American radio. "Viva la Vida" topped Billboard's Modern Rock and Hot Adult Top 40 charts as well, becoming the first single in Capitol history to achieve the feat on the latter.
Despite being disqualified from British rankings at first due to album pre-order restrictions on iTunes, the song eventually debuted atop the UK Singles Chart, making it Coldplay's first track to do so. In June 2024, PPL ranked "Viva la Vida" as the band's most played song across radio and television in the United Kingdom, averaging 27 reproductions a day since release. A year later, the track was placed at number 159 on the list of most streamed songs of all time on Apple Music.
In Canada, the single made a "Hot Shot Debut" at number four on the Canadian Hot 100 on the 24 May issue, making it Coldplay's highest debut there. It is also one of Coldplay's three highest-charting singles in Australia, reaching number two (both "A Sky Full of Stars" and "Something Just Like This" matched this peak in 2014 and 2017, respectively). In the week starting 27 November 2023, the single once again returned to the same charts, entering at number 28. In New Zealand, the song was less successful, peaking at number 16; however, the song stayed in the top 40 for 27 non-consecutive weeks. In Spain, the single peaked at number two and had strong airplay on the Spanish radio stations.


== Sporting usage ==

During the 2008–09 season, the German football club Hamburger SV used "Viva la Vida" as their goal celebration song.
It's also the goal celebration song of the German football club Hannover 96.
The song also became the anthem of Spanish football club FC Barcelona starting in the 2008–09 season. It turned out to be a season of unprecedented success for the Spanish club in 2009, as they won all six competitions they could possibly be involved in, which no football club has managed before in history. The song was selected by the manager of the club, Pep Guardiola – himself a Coldplay fan – to help motivate and encourage his team. It was often played at the Camp Nou before the start of a Barcelona match. The song was also played during Pep Guardiola's farewell before his final match coaching Barcelona at the Nou Camp, a 4–0 victory against Espanyol on 5 May 2012. The song was also played on Gerard Pique's final game at the Camp Nou on November 5, 2022, marking the end of his 25-year-long career with FC Barcelona. 
UEFA used "Viva la Vida" as the goal celebration song for the 2012 UEFA Champions League Final and Europa League Final.
The National Hockey League's New York Rangers played "Viva la Vida" at Madison Square Garden after victories during the 2011 season.
The song was used by the Vancouver Canucks in a tribute video during Markus Näslund's number retirement ceremony held in Vancouver's Rogers Arena. It was also used in Game 7 of the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals when the Boston Bruins won the Stanley Cup on Vancouver Ice.
The Kansas City Chiefs play the song at the end of home games in Arrowhead Stadium. Additionally, it is also used by the Kansas City Royals to celebrate home runs and wins at Kauffman Stadium.
This was the at-bat music of Scott Rolen, former third baseman of the Cincinnati Reds.
The song was also used pre-match during every 2008 Rugby League World Cup game before the two teams took to the field and in the band's Super Bowl 50 halftime show in 2016 at Levi's Stadium in Santa Clara, California. It was used at 2020 Tokyo Olympics as victory song when Canada Women's National Soccer Team won gold medal on August 6, 2021, the song was also used in a music video to honour Phil Taylor in his retirement at the 2018 PDC World Darts Championship.


== Plagiarism allegations ==
Coldplay were first accused of plagiarism for the melody of "Viva la Vida" by American band Creaky Boards. Singer Andrew Hoepfner, claimed that Martin had heard them playing their piece "The Songs I Didn't Write" at a live show in October 2007. They also published a video comparing sections of both tracks. A spokesperson for Coldplay stated that Martin was working at AIR Studios in London at the time. Additionally, a demo of "Viva la Vida" was recorded in March 2007. Creaky Boards later retracted the accusations and speculated that both songs may have been inspired by the video game The Legend of Zelda.
In December 2008, American guitarist Joe Satriani filed a copyright infringement lawsuit against Coldplay in Los Angeles. It declared that "Viva la Vida" incorporates "substantial, original portions" of his composition "If I Could Fly", from Is There Love in Space? (2004). The band denied the allegation, saying the similarities were entirely coincidental. The case was later dismissed by the California Central District Court, with each party paying their own costs.
In May 2009, British musician Cat Stevens stated that "Viva la Vida" is similar to "Foreigner Suite" (1973), comparing them after talking with his son about it. Stevens informed that any legal action he intended to take depended "on how well Satriani does". In June 2009, he claimed that "They did copy my song but I don't think they did it on purpose [...] I don't want them to think I am angry with them. I'd love to sit down and have a cup of tea with them and let them know it's okay".
In a documentary for Sveriges Television (2011), American music professor Dr. Lawrence Ferrara showed that the melody structures of "Viva la Vida", "If I Could Fly" and "Foreigner Suite" were all similar to the track "Se Tu M'Ami", which has its authorship attributed to Italian composers Alessandro Parisotti and Giovanni Battista Pergolesi. The latter died in 1736. "Obviously this is a work that we would call in the 'public domain'", Ferrara concluded. Discussing the accusations, drummer Champion stated that "We're confident we haven't done anything wrong" and "for some reason, God only knows why, the successful songs seem to be the ones that are accused of being stolen". Martin later revealed that the plagiarism allegations were inspiring to him: "If everyone's trying to take away our best song, then we'd better write 25 better ones".


== Formats and track listings ==


== Credits and personnel ==
Chris Martin – composer, performer
Guy Berryman – composer, performer
Jonny Buckland – composer, performer
Will Champion – composer, performer
Additional personnel
Brian Eno – sonic landscapes
Mike Kezner – sitar
Davide Rossi – strings


== Live version ==

The song and "Lost+" were performed live at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards, which took place at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, on 8 February 2009. Coldplay performed a medley of "Lost+" and "Viva la Vida" at the ceremony. American rapper Jay-Z, who was the guest vocalist on "Lost+", performed "Lost+" with Coldplay onstage. The performance was recorded and released on 8 February 2009.

Track listing


== Covers ==

Swedish singer Darin's cover of the song reached number 1 on 30 October 2009 on the Swedish Singles Chart and was certified Gold by the GLF in 2010. The song appears on Darin's 2010 album Lovekiller. In 2010, it was yet again included as the B-side of Darin's "You're Out of My Life" single, reaching No. 3 in the Swedish Singles Chart. Coldplay's original single had already charted in Sweden for a total of 49 weeks between 15 May 2008 and 23 October 2009, peaking at number seven. Weezer recorded a cover of the song for the deluxe version of their 2010 album Hurley. YouTuber CaptainSparklez released a parody version called "Fallen Kingdom" in 2012, which quickly became popular.


== Charts ==


== Certifications and sales ==


== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Frida Kahlo's Viva la Vida Archived 12 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine