The music in the Civilization video game series has been composed by various composers.


== Civilization ==
The soundtrack of the original Civilization game was available in either digital MIDI format for DOS version, or in tracker format for Amiga version. Most of original tunes were composed by Jeff Briggs, while others were taken from traditional or classic compositions, referring to each national culture (civilization) represented in the game. The same music used for the Aztecs was also applied to the Barbarians whenever they invaded a city.

Romans – "Augustus Rises" (original)
Babylonians – "Hammurabi's Code" (original)
Germans – DOS version: "Variatio 4: Lo stesso movimento" from Goldberg Variations (Johann Sebastian Bach); Amiga version: "Rondo alla Turca" (Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart)
Egyptians – "Harvest Of the Nile" (original)
Americans – "Battle Hymn of the Republic"
Greek – "Aristotle's Pupil" (original)
Mongols – "Mongol Horde" (original)
Russians – "Song of the Volga Boatmen" (traditional)
Zulus – (original)
French – "La Marseillaise"
Aztecs – "Tenochtitlan Revealed" (original)
Chinese – "The Shining Path" (traditional)
English – "Rondeau" from Symphonies and Fanfares for the King's Supper (Jean-Joseph Mouret)
Indians – "Gautama Ponders" (original)
Besides the main theme, sometimes known as "Civilization Opening Theme", other tunes used in the game were Ode to Joy from Beethoven's Ninth Symphony in the "leader's day" celebration in cities, as well as the Funeral March from Beethoven's Third Symphony.


=== Civilization Jukebox ===
Microprose created a DOS application called 'Civilization Jukebox' as a way to listen to Civilization MIDI files directly outside of game play.  It is compatible with Adlib, Tandy or Roland MT32 sound cards, along with PC Speaker.  It includes a menu system to select tracks.


== Civilization II ==
Civilization II's music is in the Red Book CD-audio format, the same as that found on normal music CDs. The songs are quite varied; some are from the 19th century classical era, such as the Blue Danube Waltz, while others have a tribal, tropical sound to them. The music can be played back through any CD-ROM drive. Over 200 MB of space on the Civilization II CD is taken up by the music, 280 MB is occupied by the videos (many of them are historical footages), whereas the actual program data takes up less than 30 MB.
The five different releases of Civilization II have added and subtracted tracks from the mix, with Fantastic Worlds containing the largest number of tracks of all releases.


=== Wonders of the World Music ===
Whenever a player builds a Wonder of the World, a short video with music is played. The music is often taken from other sources:

King Richard's Crusade – Dance of the Furies, Christoph Willibald Gluck
Leonardo's Workshop – Cantaloupe Island, Herbie Hancock
Michelangelo's Chapel – Credo from Missa Papae Marcelli, Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina
J.S. Bach's Cathedral – Toccata and Fugue in D minor, Johann Sebastian Bach
Shakespeare's Theatre – taken from the prologue to Henry V
Statue of Liberty – El Capitan March, John Philip Sousa
Isaac Newton's College – Concerto For 4 Violins & Strings in B minor, Antonio Vivaldi
Adam Smith's Trading Company – The Entrance of the Queen of Sheba from the oratorio Solomon, George Frideric Handel
Most videos, however, feature original compositions with often discernible inspiration, either from Peter Gabriel's soundtrack to The Last Temptation of Christ:

Pyramids – "The Feeling Begins"
Great Wall of China – "Gethsemane"
Sun Tzu's War Academy – "Gethsemane"
Trevor Jones' and Randy Edelman's soundtrack to The Last of the Mohicans (1992):

Colossus – main title
Great Lighthouse – "Elk Hunt"
Marco Polo's Embassy – "Promontory"
Magellan's Expedition – "Fort Battle"
United Nations – "The Glade"
Or various other sources:

Oracle – Theme from Harry's Game by Clannad
Women's Suffrage – Swinging at the Daisy Chain by the Count Basie Orchestra
Hoover Dam – a remix version of "Arkham Bridge" from the soundtrack of the PC game Mechwarrior 2 Ghost Bears Legacy by Gregory Alper & Jeehun Hwang.
Manhattan Project – I Had My Chance by Morphine
Apollo Program – Telegraph Road by Dire Straits


== Civilization III ==
Civilization III is a 2001 strategy game from Firaxis Games. As the game progresses, the music changes to reflect the era. There are five different mixes that represent the five major cultural groupings of the Civs in the game (European, North American, Middle Eastern, Greco-Roman, and Asian).
During diplomatic negotiations with leaders of other civilizations, there are both aggressive and passive tracks for each culture grouping that play depending on the mood of the civilization the player negotiates with. All the music in the game is stored in MP3 format.
Roger Briggs and Mark Cromer are credited with the game's music.
Ambient Music

Diplomacy Music


== Civilization IV ==

The music of the computer game Civilization IV features a large variety of tracks both original and historical, from Gregorian chants to modern minimalism, and makes extensive use of classical music as well as both world music and folk music. Such a focus on the soundtrack and the inclusion of classical, world and folk music are rare among games, though relatively common for strategy games.
Original music was composed by Jeff Briggs, Mark Cromer, Michael Curran, and Christopher Tin. Additional original music was created for the expansions, Civilization IV: Warlords and Civilization IV: Beyond the Sword, including music for each of the several scenarios. Civilization IV: Warlords also adds music from Civilization III to fill out the background music for the Classical Era. All tracks are stored on the hard drive in MP3 format, making them perfectly usable outside the game.
Christopher Tin composed both the opening movie theme and the game's main theme "Baba Yetu",  which went on to win the 2011 Grammy Award for Best Instrumental Arrangement Accompanying Vocalist(s).
Vocals for all pieces by Christopher Tin were performed by Stanford Talisman. The other tracks (especially the polyphony from the Medieval section) are performed by a variety of groups, who are not credited on the original soundtrack.


=== Leader themes ===
Each leader has his or her own theme music, reflecting the country or culture of that leader. Each leitmotif has three variants, corresponding to different time periods in the game. These original arrangements are shorter and simpler pieces, from just under 40 seconds to three minutes. Some are renditions of famous pieces of classical music, such as Frederick's piece, which is a paraphrase of the fourth of the Goldberg Variations, or Bismarck's, which is the opening theme of the second movement of Beethoven's Symphony No. 3. Other themes have been modified from earlier Civilization games.


=== Background music ===
Each of the game's time periods has its own set of background music appropriate for the era. The Ancient and Classical eras are limited to four original tracks that mostly focus on ambience and primitive instruments such as drums and the flute. The Medieval era features medieval and Renaissance music, both instrumental and chants, such as Kyrie by Ockeghem. The Renaissance era uses baroque and classical music by Mozart, Beethoven, and Bach. The soundtrack to the Industrial era focuses on romantic music mostly by Brahms, Dvořák, and Beethoven. The Modern era music consists exclusively of music by American minimalist composer John Adams.
For the classical music in the game's renaissance and industrial eras, game designer Soren Johnson selected pieces with a focus on dance music and middle movements of symphonies, as pieces with more dynamic range were not suitable for ambient game music. Johnson's choice of background music was praised for its modern-era focus on works by John Adams, as well as its inclusion of both well-known and relatively obscure classical composers.
Orchestral samples in the game are from the Vienna Symphonic Library, which features recordings of classical music by members of the Vienna Philharmonic.


== Civilization V ==
The soundtrack of Civilization V contains many hours of licensed music as well as an original score of primarily leader music written by Geoff Knorr and Michael Curran. The original score, recorded with the FILMharmonic Orchestra Prague, features new compositions as well as folk songs and famous compositions. Each leader's theme is based on a traditional melody representing that leader's culture. Some of the songs in the game were released as a 2-disc soundtrack as part of the Deluxe Edition.  The track listing of the soundtrack is:

However, some leader themes, city state themes, and the ambient music are omitted from the soundtrack.

Each city state in the game also has a short theme around 10 to 30 seconds in length.


=== Ambient music ===
Civilization V contains close to 15 hours of licensed music, including many tracks courtesy of APM Music and De Wolfe Music.
The ambient background music depends on the regional grouping of the player's Civ (Americas, Asia, Europe, or Middle East/Africa), and whether the player is at peace or at war.


=== Gods & Kings ===
The Civilization V expansion, Gods & Kings, includes the soundtrack within the game files.
1. Opening Movie Music
2. Gods & Kings Theme, based on Te Deum
3, 4. Gustavus Adolphus – Sweden – "Du Gamla, Du Fria"
5, 6. Boudicca – The Celts – "Lord Gregory, The Lass of Aughrim"
7, 8. William of Orange – The Netherlands – "In Naam van Oranje"
9, 10. Maria Theresa – Austria – "Requiem Mass" in D minor; "Still Still Still"
11, 12. Attila – The Huns – "Li Ling Si Han"
13, 14. Dido – Carthage – "Hymn to Nikkal"
15, 16. Theodora – Byzantium – "Phos Hilaron"
17, 18. Haile Selassie – Ethiopia – "Traditional melody"; Selassie's National Anthem
19, 20. Pacal – The Maya – "Traditional melody fragments"
21. Fall of Rome
22. The Medieval World – "Messe de Notre Dame"
23. Smoky Skies


=== Brave New World ===
The second Civilization V expansion, Brave New World, contains the following original music:

Civilization V: Brave New World – Opening Movie Music
Civilization V: Brave New World Theme – Opening Menu Music (lyrics based on the Latin text of chapter 21 of the Book of Revelation as found in the Vulgate)
Assyria – Ashurbanipal – "Ancient Assyrian Chant"
Indonesia – Gajah Mada – "Udan Mas"
Brazil – Pedro II – "Chega de Saudade"
Poland – Casimir – "Bóg się rodzi"
Portugal – Maria I – "Saudades de Coimbra"
Morocco – Ahmad Al-Mansur – "Mawal Gnawi"
Shoshone – Pocatello – "Shoshone Sun Dance Songs"
Venice – Enrico Dandolo – "Rotta Ò Sonata"
Zulu – Shaka – "Inhliziyo Yami"
Scramble for Africa Scenario – "Ujuba na takaburi"
The Civil War (this song came bundled with the Gods and Kings expansion as well, but was not used in the game)
Conquest of the New World – Orchestral Version


== Civilization: Beyond Earth ==
The soundtrack for Civilization: Beyond Earth was composed entirely by Geoff Knorr, Michael Curran, Griffin Cohen and Grant Kirkhope. The soundtrack was critically acclaimed and won the 2014 IFMCA Best Original Score for a Video Game or Interactive Media, in addition to many other accolades.
Music in Civilization: Beyond Earth includes:

The Seeding – (trailer theme) – Geoff Knorr
Beyond Earth – (menu theme) – Geoff Knorr
The Lush Planet – Geoff Knorr
The Lush Planet - Ambient Early – Griffin Cohen
Beauty in the Eye of the Orbiter – Geoff Knorr
Destroyer – Geoff Knorr
The Lush Planet – Ambient Middle—Griffin Cohen
Lux Perpetua – Geoff Knorr
Benedicite – Geoff Knorr
The Lush Planet – Ambient Late—Griffin Cohen
Our New World – Geoff Knorr
The Fungal Planet – Geoff Knorr
The Fungal Planet – Ambient Early—Griffin Cohen
Acclimation – Geoff Knorr
Promethean – Geoff Knor
The Fungal Planet – Ambient Middle – Griffin Cohen
Xenomalleum – Geoff Knorr
The Fungal Planet – Ambient Late – Griffin Cohen
A New Beginning – Geoff Knorr
The Arid Planet – Michael Curran
The Arid Planet – Ambient Early—Griffin Cohen
Solar Collector – Grant Krikhope
Dogmatic Engineering – Grant Kirkhope
The Arid Planet – Ambient Middle – Griffin Cohen
Xeno Titan – Grant Kirkhope
The Signal – Grant Kirkhope
The Arid Planet – Ambient Late—Griffin Cohen
Deep Memory – Grant Kirkhope
Planetfall – Michael Curran
Planetfall – Ambient Early 1 – Griffin Cohen
Alien Shores – Michael Curran
Sky Mine – Michael Curran
Planetfall – Ambient Early 2 – Griffin Cohen
Earth's Ambassadors – Michael Curran
O Muse – Michael Curran
Planetfall – Ambient Middle – Griffin Cohen
Deep Space – Michael Curran
Planetfall – Ambient Late 1 – Griffin Cohen
Xenomancer – Michael Curran
Planetfall – Ambient Late 2 – Griffin Cohen
Solid State Citizen – Griffin Cohen
The Future of Mankind – Geoff Knorr


=== Rising Tide ===
Three of the four composers from the original game (Geoff Knorr, Griffin Cohen, and Grant Kirkhope) returned to compose the music for the Rising Tide expansion.

Reunited – Geoff Knorr – 2:14
Rising Tide – Geoff Knorr – 4:56
The Abyss – Geoff Knorr – 3:10
The Abyss – Ambient Early – Griffin Cohen – 4:54
Upon the Expanse – Geoff Knorr – 4:05
Ebb and Flow – Geoff Knorr – 4:06
The Abyss – Ambient Middle – Griffin Cohen – 4:03
Dive – Geoff Knorr – 3:56
Tide Hunter – Geoff Knorr – 3:31
The Abyss – Ambient Late – Griffin Cohen – 3:52
Neptune's Glory – Geoff Knorr – 5:00
The Old World – Griffin Cohen – 3:13
The Old World – Ambient Early – Griffin Cohen – 4:36
Holocene – Grant Kirkhope – 4:19
Terra Incognita – Grant Kirkhope – 4:49
The Old World – Ambient Middle – Griffin Cohen – 3:57
Ice and Conquest – Grant Kirkhope – 4:59
The Dendrite Frontier – Grant Kirkhope – 5:15
The Old World – Ambient Late – Griffin Cohen – 4:13
Fractal Aquilon – Grant Kirkhope – 4:21
The Young World – Geoff Knorr – 3:21
The Young World – Ambient Early – Griffin Cohen – 3:36
Immortal – Geoff Knorr – 5:18
Mobius Horn – Geoff Knorr – 3:32
The Young World – Ambient Middle – Griffin Cohen – 3:27
Lahar – Geoff Knorr – 5:27
Primordial Majesty – Geoff Knorr – 5:08
The Young World – Ambient Late – Griffin Cohen – 3:55
Hybrid Champion – Geoff Knorr – 5:52


== Civilization VI ==
Christopher Tin wrote Civilization VI's main theme, "Sogno di Volare" (translated as "The Dream of Flight"). The theme was written to capture the spirit of exploration not only in "seeking new lands, but also the mental exploration of expanding the frontiers of science and philosophy". Tin premiered the song at a London concert in July 2016.
The game's original score was written and orchestrated primarily by Geoff Knorr, who was assisted by Roland Rizzo and Phill Boucher.  It was performed by the Prague FILMharmonic Orchestra. The score was widely acclaimed and was nominated for 2016 Music of the Year by the Game Audio Network Guild. Knorr, Rizzo, and Boucher returned to score the game's DLCs and expansion packs, which also received award nominations.
Each civilization has a main theme which evolves as the player progresses throughout the game's eras. Each theme has four versions, corresponding to the Ancient, Medieval, Industrial, and Atomic eras (the other eras each feature the most recent theme; for example, the Classical era features the theme of the Ancient era). Simple single instrument melodies in the Ancient era turn into orchestral versions of the same melodies in later eras, symbolizing the evolution and growth of one's civilization throughout the ages.
Every civilization, excluding Sumeria, also features "ambient" themes that play during the Ancient, Classical, Medieval, and Renaissance eras.
During a game session, the themes (main and ambient) of each participating civilization (including eliminated ones) will be featured in the in-game music.


=== Base game and minor DLCs ===
The main theme of each civilization is written in bold. The ambient themes are also listed.

America - Hard Times Come Again No More, Arkansas Traveler, New Five Cent Piece, Sally in the Garden, Valley Forge
Arabia - Banat Iskandaria, Kawala and Sufi improvisation, Qanun improvisation
Australia (DLC) - Waltzing Matilda, Click Go the Shears, Billy of Tea, Ryebuck Shearer, Travelling Down The Castlereagh, The Overlander, With My Swag On My Shoulder, Didgeridoo improvisation
Aztec - Traditional nahua music, Flute improvisation, Hand drum and wood drum improvisation
Brazil - Brejeiro, Tico-Tico no Fubá, Branca, Tardes Em Lindoia, Terna Saudade
China - Mo Li Hua, Guzheng improvisation, Fisherman's Song at Dusk, High Mountain Flowing Water, Lotus Above Water, Rain, Winter Flower
Egypt - El Helwa Di, Ney, Sufi, and Oud improvisation
England - Scarborough Fair, Bonny Boy, Green Bushes, Greensleeves, The Bold Grenadier, High Germany, Lovely Joan
France - Tourdion - Quand je bois du vin clairet, Douce Dame Jolie, E Dame Jolie, Quand Je Suis Mis Au Retour, Ce fut en mai, Trouvère and Flute improv
Germany - Ich hab die Nacht geträumet, Wenn ich ein Vöglein wär, Ein Jäger aus Kurpfalz, In Stiller Nacht, Mayenzeit one Neidt, Schwesterlein, Spinn Spinn,
Greece - Song of Seikilos, Hymn to Helios, Lament of Ajax the Great, various ancient Greek music melody fragments
India - Vaishnava Jana To, Bansuri and Tabla improvisation
Indonesia (DLC) - Bapang Selisir, Rejang Dewa, Udan Mas, Lenker
Japan - Lullaby of Itsuki, Beauty of Nature, Moon Over The Deserted Castle, Rokudan no shirabe, Shaku improvisation
Khmer (DLC) - Khmer Rourm Sam Mawgee, Flower World, Kolon Kolkret, Lao Lik, Pri Prhn, Kawnsaing Snai
Kongo - Banaha, Mama Munu Dile, Salampasu, percussion improvisation
Macedon (DLC) - Tino Mori, Berance, Jano Mori, Duduk improvisation
Norway - Gjendines Bådnlåt, Bansul etter Beate, Fairy Tale Girl, Prillarguri Fra Land, Seljefløyte and Bukkehorn improvisation
Nubia (DLC) - Allah Musau, Zafa, Salaam Ya, drums improvisation
Persia (DLC) - Kereshmeh and Reng-e Shalakhu, Morge Sahar, Tonbak and Santur improvisation
Poland (DLC) - Hej idę w las, Polka music, Czerwienne, clarinet folk dance
Rome - Magna Mater, Mare Nostrum, Aulos, Brass, Flute, and Lute improvisation
Russia - Kalinka, Tonkaja Rjabina, Bright Shines the Moon, Going Home, Balalaika improvisation
Scythia - Original Melody, Duduk improvisation
Spain - Recuerdos de la Alhambra, Romance Anonimo (2 variations), Guitar improvisation
Sumeria - Hurrian Hymn to Nikkal


=== Rise and Fall ===
Cree - Round Dance Song from The Drums of Poundmaker, Cut Knife Hill, Hand drum improvisation
Georgia - Shen Khar Venakhi (Thou Art a Vineyard), Tsaiqvanes Tamar Kali, Didavoi Nana, Khinstskala, Kuchkhi Bedineri, Lazhghvash, Shairebi, Tsminda Ninos, Utsinares Mas
Korea - Arirang, Doraji, Buk and Janggu improvisation, Milyang Arirang, drum ensembles improvisation
Mapuche - Traditional Mapuche music, Flute, Kunkulkawe, and Brass improvisation
Mongolia - Ukhert Khuiten Khoyor, Urtiin Duu, Jalam Har, Topshur, Morin Khuur, and Khoomi improvisation
Netherlands - Merck Toch Hoe Sterck, Gaillarde e L'esmerillone, Canary dance, Domine quando veneris, Vox in Rama, J'ai veu le point du jour, Tu te trompes Phillis, Dies sind die heilgen zehn Gebot
Scotland - Scotland the Brave, Bonnie Dundee, Cock o' the North, Chì mi na mòrbheanna, Hector the Hero, MacCrimmon's Sweetheart, Believe Me, My Longings, Snare improvisation, When the Battle is O'er
Zulu - Uthe Ubhuti Asizomlanda, Halala, Bayisa, Shaka Mamba, Aniboyizobekha, Thula Baba, Encome, Clapping, Ululation, and Sangoma Drum improvisation


=== Gathering Storm ===
Canada - Vive la Canadienne, Crooked Stove Pipe, O Canada, À la claire fontaine, Ave Maris Stella, Come All Ye Bold Canadians, Farewell to Nova Scotia
Hungary - Hej Dunáról fúj a szél, Cinege cinege, Apor Lázár tánca, Még azt mondják nem ilik, Régi táncdal, Házasodik a Tücsök, Két Szál Pünkösdrózsa, Szatmári verbunk
Inca - Siempre Macho, Carnaval de Tambobama, Corazoncito, Piquicha, Sikuri, Shakers and drums improvisation
Mali - Mali Sadio, Masana Seesay, Alla Lakay, Bani, Concoba, Jawara, Jeili Foli Lomba, Kalefa, Sunjata, Pentatonic improvisation
Maori - Pokarekare Ana, Ka Mate, Hine E Hine, Me He Manu Rere, Paikea, Tika Tonu Haka
Ottomans - Yelkenler Biçilecek, Ey büt-i nev edâ olmuşum müptelâ, Ceddin Deden, Hicaz Hümâyun Peşrevi, Nice Bir, Nikriz Peşrevi, Rast Nakış Beste
Phoenicia - Hurrian Hymn to Nikkal n°6 (Phoenician version), numerous variations of the same theme with different instruments including the duduk.
Sweden - Slängpolska efter Byss-Calle, Helan Går, Polska efter Pelle Fors, Du gamla, du fria, Herr Holger, Herr Mannelig, Ridmarsch efter Byss-Calle


=== New Frontier Pass ===
Maya - Xtoles, Bolonchon, Rabinal Achi, Entrada Gueguechos, Baile del Venado, Mayan trumpets, ocarina and percussions improvisations. (A similar melody can be heard in the third movement of La noche de los mayas by Silvestre Revueltas.)
Gran Colombia - Velo que Bonito, Reir Llorando, Pajarillo, Currulao, Indios Farotos, Cumbia, Joropo Pajarillo
Ethiopia - Tizita, Bati, Tizita minor, Ambassel, Anchihoye Lene
Byzantium - Ti Ypermácho Stratigō, Kontakion of the Mother of God, Phos Hilaron, Justinian's Hymn, Ton Despotin, Polychronion of the Basileus
Gaul - La Brabançonne, Original Melody, drum solo and metal drums, lyre improvisations
Babylon - Original Melody, gold lyre of Ur, ney and percussions improvisations
Vietnam - Trống Cơm, Lý kéo chài, Lý giăng câu, Lưu Thuỷ Hành Vân,  Lưu Thủy, Kim Tiền, Xuân Phong, Long Hổ, Lý Tình Tang, Tứ Đại Oán, Bèo Dạt Mây Trôi
Portugal - Fado menor, Fado Corrido, Fado Hilario, Fado Mouraria, Ceifeira, Malhão Velho


== Civilization VII ==
Christopher Tin wrote Civilization VII's main theme, "Live Gloriously". The music will be composed by Geoff Knorr and Roland Rizzo.


=== Base game ===
Aksumite -
Egyptians -
Greeks - Second Delphic Hymn, Katolophyromai
Han - Yáng Guān Sān Dié, Hàn Gōng Qiū Yuè
Khmer - Robam Apsara
Mauryan - Namokar Mantra, Tisarana Atthanga Sila, Rig Veda 2.23.1
Maya -
Missisippian - Choctaw folk songs
Persian - Chaharpareh Mahur, Navâ-ye Ney, Morq-e sahar
Roman -
Abbasid - Khorshid Nimeh Shab
Chola - Pittā Pirṟai Soodi Thevaram
Hawaiian - Ua Nani Hā`ena I Ka `Ehu Kai
Incan - Wiphala, Siempre Macho
Majapahit - Cacandran
Ming - Zào Luó Páo
Mongolian - Ertnii Saikhan, Sèr Sèr Salkhi
Norman - Branle de Champaigne and Suite Renascentista by Claude Gervaise, Pavanes by Adrian Willaert, Le Roi Anglois
Shawnee (DLC) - Shawnee folk songs
Songhai - Takamba
Spanish - A Este Sol Peregrino
Americans - Chester, The Road to Boston
Buganda - Ekitiibwa kya Buganda
French - La Marseillaise, Ça Ira, Lo Boièr
Meiji  - Sakura Sakura, Rokudan no shirabe, Kagome Kagome
Mexicans - El Son de la Negra
Mughal - Piya Ki Najariya, Dhrut Teen Taal, Raag Yaman, Eri Aali Piya Bin
Prussians - Zeminnika Kweitākedi
Qing - Xī Huánghuā, Gǒng Jīnōu
Russians - Hymn to Red October, Polovetskie Plyaski, Krasnaya Armiya Vsekh Sil'ney, Shekherazada, V Sredney Azii, 1812 Goda
Siamese - Kĥāngkhāw kin kl̂wy


=== Crossroads of the World ===
Carthaginians  - Hurrian songs
Bulgarians  - Rano Mi e Slŭntse Ogreyalo, Kozhil’o Pisan i Sheryan, Snoshti e Dobra
British  - Jerusalem
Nepaleses  - Rukum Maikot, Resham Firiri


=== Right to Rule ===
Assyrians - Debke
Silla - Sujecheon
Vietnamese - Lưu Thủy Kim Tiền - Xuân Phong Long Hổ
Qajar - Salâm-e Shâh, Tasnif-e Ta Be Zolf–e Khish


=== Tides of Power ===
Republic of Pirates - Down Among the Dead Man, A-Roving
Icelandic -
Ottoman - Rast Nakış Beste
Tongan - Fangufangu, Nafa Drum, Lā Mai Lā Mai Pelee, Moengāngongo Táu Fe'ao


== References ==


== External links ==
Lyrics to Baba Yetu
Lyrics to the Gods & Kings Theme