O'Dwyer v. Nair Libel Case, also known as the O'Dwyer-Nair Trial was a libel case held in London in English law against the Indian politician and lawyer Sir C. Sankaran Nair, by former Lieutenant Governor of the Punjab, Sir Michael O'Dwyer. The case arose from statements made in Nair's 1922 book Gandhi and Anarchy, in which he criticised O'Dwyer's administration and held him responsible for the events leading to the Punjab Disturbances, particularly the Jallianwala Bagh massacre of 1919.  
The preliminary hearing was held in October 1923 at the Lahore High Court. The case was later brought before Justice Henry McCardie in the King's Bench Division in April 1924, five years after the massacre. Though not formally on trial, Reginald Dyer's role in the massacre was central to the proceedings, with the case often viewed as a proxy examination of his actions in Amritsar. After a five-week trial, the jury delivered its verdict on 29 May 1924, with all jurors except Harold Laski ruling in favour of O'Dwyer. Nair was ordered to pay damages and legal costs. The outcome of the trial renewed public scrutiny of British actions in Punjab.


== Background ==
On 9 April 1919, fearing a rebellion over the effects on Indians of the Rowlatt Acts, which extended emergency powers and allowed imprisonment without trial, Lieutenant Governor of the Punjab, Sir Michael O'Dwyer barred Gandhi from entering the province of Punjab, British India, and the following day, ordered the deportation of Amritsar's two leading local figures, Saifuddin Kitchlew and Satyapal. These moves set off a series of violent outbreaks that lasted more than a month and came to be known as the Punjab Disturbances. Protests that day turned violent, resulting in attacks on government buildings and casualties among both Indians and Europeans. On 13 April, Reginald Dyer, ordered troops to fire on a peaceful gathering at Jallianwala Bagh, resulting in the Jallianwala Bagh massacre. The unrest spread to other towns, including Gujranwala, where the following day British forces used aerial bombing to control crowds. Dyer's actions were backed by O'Dwyer, whose administration was known for its harsh measures. The Hunter Commission, set up to investigate, condemned the shootings but imposed no formal punishment. Dyer was forced to retire, but not prosecuted.
In 1922 O'Dwyer was in England writing his memoir India as I Knew It, when Indian politician, lawyer, and former member of the Viceroy's Executive Council, Sir C. Sankaran Nair, published Gandhi and Anarchy. The book began with criticisms of the non-cooperation movement, accusing Gandhi of being blind to the atrocities committed by Muslims against Hindus. O'Dwyer agreed with this part of the book. He wrote in his memoir, "If [Nair's] book stopped there...I would have fully supported him, as I had been advocating the same idea for three years, but for some reason, he felt the need to single me out and criticise me."


== Lawsuit ==

As a former member of the Viceroy's Council, Nair believed he had access to information that had not been made public, which gave him the confidence to place full blame on O'Dwyer. Several passages from Nair's book formed the basis of the libel case, particularly in the chapter titled 'The Punjab atrocities', regarding the suppression of the Punjab Disturbances including the Jallianwala Bagh massacre. In one instance, he criticised the powers held by colonial officials, stating that "before the Reforms it was in the power of the Lieutenant-Governor, a single individual, to commit atrocities in the Punjab." O'Dwyer was ready to take legal action for libel over this statement alone. In another part of the book, Nair attributed First World War recruitment increases to coercive methods, claiming that "the recruitment of non-Mohammedans also went up and both were due to the terrorism of Sir Michael O'Dwyer, very useful in this instance." A third passage challenged official recognition of O'Dwyer, declaring, "I realise that the eulogium passed by the English Cabinet on Lord Chelmsford and Sir Michael O'Dwyer was an outrage on public opinion." 
In response, in 1923, O'Dwyer recruited London solicitors Sir William Joynson-Hicks and Co. to issue an order for defamation. Nair had  refused to both retract his remarks and pay the requested £1,000 in damages. Witnesses were subsequently listed to be assessed in Lahore, with a view to a hearing in London.


== Preliminary hearing ==
The preliminary hearing took place in October 1923 at the Lahore High Court, and included sworn statements from around 125 defence witnesses based in India,  including Chimanlal Harilal Setalvad and Mian Muhammad Shafi, and some from Gandhi's Congress Inquiry. Nair was represented by Bakshi Tek Chand, while Sheikh Abdul Qadir served as counsel for O'Dwyer. O'Dwyer submitted a list of eight witnesses. His Indian witnesses were exclusively from the upper class, including six landowners and tribal chiefs.


== Trial ==
On 30 April 1924, in London, the case came before Justice Henry McCardie in the King's Bench Division. Ernest Charles represented O'Dwyer. Wilson and Company Solicitors represented Nair, with Walter Schwabe as his counsel.
Nair faced a major disadvantage in the English courts of 1924. Few were willing to back his claim that O'Dwyer had been oppressive, and those who did had little public influence. Lasting five weeks, the jury was made up of three women and nine men, including the left-wing academic Harold Laski. Though Nair's Indian witnesses included 15 lawyers, 11 doctors, three educators, and six well-known businessmen, McCardie saw these as far less credible.
The trial focused on proving or disproving two main points: that the general in charge at Jallianwalla Bagh, Amritsar, on 13 April 1919, Reginald Dyer's order to open fire that day was an atrocity, and that O'Dwyer was to blame or played a role in making it happen. By 1924, Dyer was too ill to attend and confined to a wheelchair, though the case largely served to examine and judge his actions as if he were the one on trial. 


=== Testimony ===
In Lahore, onlooking Bar members supplied newspapers with reports until 24 November 1923.


== Closing argument and verdict ==

At the trial's close, McCardie summed up the case by instructing the jury. He made his sympathies with Dyer clear, expressing his opinion that "Dyer, under the grave and exceptional circumstances, acted rightly, and in my opinion, upon his evidence, he was wrongly punished by the Secretary of State for India".
On 29 May 1924, except for Laski, the remaining 11 jurors voted in O'Dwyer's favour. Nair was made to pay for the cost of the trial in addition to damages. O'Dwyer received £500 and costs of £20,000.


== Response ==
The trial was widely covered in the UK's media, particularly The Times. Although O'Dwyer won the case, the trial renewed scrutiny of British actions in Punjab. McCardie's remarks drew criticism from the Government by openly discrediting the Hunter Committee's findings and reversing the government's earlier stance. Primeminister at the time, Ramsay Macdonald could have consulted the then Attorney General Patrick Hastings. For many, the verdict affirmed Dyer's actions.
A few days after the verdict, E. M. Forster published A Passage to India and in resentment to the verdict sent McCardie a copy.
Nair's book in vernacular was withdrawn by the British Government following the verdict.
In 2025, Karan Singh Tyagi's adaptation of the trial featured in the Indian film Kesari Chapter 2, based on the book The Case That Shook The Empire by Raghu Palat and Pushpa Palat.


== See also ==
Hugh Fraser
John Simon


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Nair, C. (Chettur) Sankaran (1922). Gandhi and Anarchy. Madras: Tagore.
Autobiography of Sir C. Sankaran Nair. Madras: Lady Madhavan Nair. 1966.
O’Dwyer, Michael (1925). India as I knew it 1885-1925. London: Constable & Co.
Palat, Raghu; Palat, Pushpa (2019). The Case That Shook the Empire: One Man's Fight for the Truth about the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre. New Delhi: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-93-89000-29-0.


== External links ==
"O'Dwyer v. Nair. (Hansard, 28 July 1924)". api.parliament.uk. Archived from the original on 13 May 2025. Retrieved 13 May 2025.