Sindhi Hindus are ethnic Sindhis who practice Hinduism and are native to, or have origins in, Sindh, Pakistan. They are spread across Sindh, primarily concentrated in the eastern districts; with a significant diasporic population in India, mainly composing the descendants of partition-era migrants who fled from Pakistan to the Dominion of India, in what was a wholesale exchange of Hindu and Muslim populations in some areas. Some later emigrated from the Indian subcontinent and settled in other parts of the world. 
According to the 2023 census, there are 4.9 million Sindhi Hindus residing within the Sindh province of Pakistan with major population centers being Mirpur Khas Division and Hyderabad Division that combined account for more than 2 million of them. Meanwhile, the 2011 census listed 2.77 million speakers of Sindhi in India, including speakers of Kutchi, a number that does not include Sindhi Hindus who no longer speak the Sindhi language. The vast majority of Sindhi Hindus living in India belong to the Lohana jāti, which includes the sub-groups of Amil, Bhaiband and Sahiti.


== History of Hinduism in Sindh ==


=== Before the Arab invasions ===
Prior to Arab invasions, majority of Sindh's population practiced Buddhism, although a significant minority adhered to Hinduism, as well. During the Arab invasions, majority of Sindhi Hindus were a rural pastoral population, who lived mostly in upper Sindh, a region that was entirely Hindu; while the Buddhists of Sindh were a mercantile population, who lived entirely in the urban areas of lower Sindh.


=== Arab rule ===
After many successful raids, collaboration by the local Buddhist population, and resistance by the local Hindu population, the army of the Umayyad Caliphate led by Muhammad Bin Qasim successfully invaded and conquered Sindh in 712CE, against the last Hindu king of Sindh, Raja Dahir.
Sindh, under the control of Qasim, saw a decline of Buddhism, as most Buddhists started converting to Islam. The later reign of the Delhi Sultanate, led to further decline, with both Hinduism and Buddhism becoming minority religions in Sindh. Buddhism later collapsed and ceased to exist in Sindh, while Hinduism remained persistent, managing to survive and flourish throughout the centuries as a minority religion. The consistency of Hinduism in Sindh is credited the dependency of the rural Hindu population on intra-regional commerce and flexibility to adapt to altered circumstances.


=== Partition and after ===
Prior to the partition of India, as per the 1941 census, the Sindhi Hindu population accounted for around 27% of Sindh's population, most of whom moved to India. Today, Sindhi Hindus in Pakistan number around 4.2 million, around 9% of the region's population. Sindhi Hindus are the largest ethnolinguistic Hindu group in Pakistan.


== Religious syncretism with Islam and Sikhism ==
Historically, Sindhi Hindus have embraced forms of religious syncretism, as a large proportion of the Sindhi Hindus have been close to Islam through revering Sufi saints at Sufi shrines as well close to Sikhism through the Nanakpanthi, an approach in which Guru Nanak's teachings are respected but without necessarily following the other gurus nor identifying as Sikhs.


== Groups and communities ==
Majority of Sindhi Hindus belong to Lohana community who are historically traders, merchants and government officials, The Sindhi Lohanas are divided into different sub-groups for example Amils, Bhaibands, Hyderabadi Bhaiband (Sindhi Varki), Sahitis, Shikarpuris, Hatvaniya/Hatwara, Thattai, Bhagnari etc, these sub-groups have their own hundreds of surnames/castes. Other communities are Bhatia (Larai and Utradi), Arora and small Shikarpuri Khatris, all of them are called as Wāniya and Deewān in Sindh and belong to Waishya Varna of Hinduism. There are also few Sindhi Brahmins for example Pokarno and Sarsat or Sarsudh. 
Hindu Rajputs are mainly found in Thar region. The tribal groups like Dhed, Bhils, Meghwars, Kolhis etc form second largest group among Sindhi Hindus and are mostly found in Southeast of Sindh. The Sindhi Hindus do not have caste based division nor the concept of higher caste or lower caste, there is no evil of untouchability.


== Sindhi Hindus in India ==


=== Partition ===
During the first half of 1948, approximately 1 million Sindhi Hindus immigrated to India. Various refugee colonies have been set up by Government of India for accommodation of Sindhi refugees across the nation like: Ahmedabad, Gandhidham, Kandla and Adipur camps in Gujarat, Sindhi Camp bus stand in Rajasthan's capital Jaipur, Cox Town camp in Karnataka's capital Bangalore and Ulhasnagar (Kalyan Camp) in Maharashtra.


=== Contemporary situation ===
According to the 2011 Census of India, there are around 2.8 million Sindhi-language speakers living in India, however, this number does not include ethnic Sindhis who no longer speak Sindhi and includes Kutchis who in some cases may not identify as ethnic Sindhis (especially those in Gujarat). Sindhis formed a major-chunk of population of Ulhasnagar Municipality (Mumbai Metropolitan Region), Maharashtra. The population of Ulhasnagar city is 500k, out of which 400k of the residents are Sindhis, thus constituting 80% of the city's population as per 2011 census report. Ulhasnagar is also known as India's "Mini Sindh" due to having the highest concentration of Sindhis in one city in India.


== Family names ==


=== Conventions ===
Most Sindhi Hindu family names are a modified form of a patronymic and typically end with the suffix "-ani", which is used to denote descent from a common male ancestor. One explanation states that the -ani suffix is a Sindhi variant of 'anshi', derived from the Sanskrit word 'ansh', which means 'descended from' (see: Devanshi). The first part of a Sindhi Hindu surname is usually derived from the name or location of an ancestor. In northern Sindh, surnames ending in 'ja' (meaning 'of') are also common. A person's surname would consist of the name of his or her native village, followed by 'ja'. The Sindhi Hindus generally add the suffix ‘-ani’ to the name of a great-grandfather and adopt the name as a family name.


=== Surnames ===


== Notable Sindhi Hindus ==

Ashish Vaswani, ex computer scientist with Google Brain, introduced Transformer neural network architecture, ceo of Essential.ai
Chunky Vazirani, Founder of vazirani-automotive.com
Bherumal Meharchand Advani, linguist, historian, novelist, poet, researcher
Kalyan Bulchand Advani, poet, critique, scholar
Kiara Advani, Indian actress
L. K. Advani, former Deputy Prime Minister of India
Nikkhil Advani, Indian movie director and screenwriter
Pankaj Advani, 23 times world champion in snooker and billiards from India.
Suresh H. Advani, oncologist who pioneered Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in India
Asrani, Indian comedian and actor
Kirat Babani, freedom fighter, writer, journalist
Babita, Indian film actress
Anant Balani, Indian film director
Rana Bhagwandas, Judge on the Supreme Court of Pakistan
Tamannaah Bhatia, Indian actress
Deepak Bhojwani, Indian diplomat
Aarti Chabria, actress
Brahma Chellaney, geostrategist and author
Vishal Dadlani, playback singer
Jairamdas Daulatram, political leader in the Indian independence movement, Governor of the Indian states of Bihar and later Assam
Raja Dahir, the last Hindu king of Sindh
Bhai Pratap Dialdas, freedom fighter, businessman, philanthropist
Harish Fabiani, Indian (NRI) businessman based in Madrid
Khialdas Fani, writer, poet, singer
Sobho Gianchandani, Pakistani Sindhi social scientist, and revolutionary writer
Gope, full name Gope Kamlani, actor in Hindi cinema
Hotchand Molchand Gurbakhshani, Educationist, Scholar and Writer
Hari Harilela, Indian businessman based in Hong Kong
Jimmi Harkishin, British Asian actor
Anita Hassanandani, Indian actress
Gopichand Hinduja, British businessman, co-chairman of the Hinduja Group
Indira Hinduja, Indian gynaecologist, obstetrician and infertility specialist who pioneered the Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT) technique
Gulab Mohanlal Hiranandani, Indian Navy officer who served as the Vice Chief of the Naval Staff
Lakhumal Hiranand Hiranandani, Indian Otorhinolaryngologist
Niranjan Hiranandani, co-founder and managing director of Hiranandani Group
Popati Hiranandani,  writer
Surendra Hiranandani, co-founder and managing director of Hiranandani Group
Rajkumar Hirani, popular Indian film director and editor
Narendra Hirwani, Indian cricketer
Micky Jagtiani, chairman and owner of Landmark Group
Dr Gurmukh Das Jagwani, former Member of Maharashtra Legislative Council
Jeet, Indian actor
Kamna Jethmalani, Indian actress
Ram Jethmalani, Indian senior lawyer, former Law Minister of India
Motilal Jotwani, Indian writer, educator, follower of Gandhi, fellow of Harvard Divinity School
Hemu Kalani, freedom fighter
Atul Khatri, stand-up comedian
Chanda Kochhar (née Advani), Former MD and chief executive officer of ICICI Bank
Krishna Kohli, Senator, Pakistan Peoples Party
Rooplo Kolhi, freedom fighter
J. B. Kripalani, freedom fighter and President of Indian National Congress
Jayant Kripalani, Film, Television and Stage actor
Krishna Kripalani, freedom fighter, author and parliamentarian
Ajith Kumar, Indian film actor
Gulu Lalvani, chairman of Binatone
Kartar Lalvani, founder and chairman of Vitabiotics
Nikita Lalwani, Indian novelist based in London
Tej Lalvani, CEO of the UK's largest vitamin company Vitabiotics
Shankar Lalwani, Indian politician and Member of Parliament in the 17th Lok Sabha from Indore, Madhya Pradesh, India.
Kishore Mahbubani, Singaporean diplomat
Vivek Mahbubani, Hong Kong comedian
K. R. Malkani, journalist, historian and politician
Mangharam Udharam Malkani, Sindhi scholar, critic, writer, playwright, literary historian and professor
N. R. Malkani, freedom fighter and social worker
Rajeev Masand, Indian film critic
Rajesh Mirchandani, global communications leader and former British television journalist
Hansika Motwani, Indian actress
Rajeev Motwani, computer scientist, Professor at Stanford University, He was an early supporter and advisor of companies like Google and PayPal
Kabir Mulchandani, Indian businessman
Seth Vishandas Nihalchand, merchant and former member of Indian National Congress at the time of Independence
Archana Panjabi, British actress
Lila Poonawalla (née Thadani), Indian industrialist, philanthropist, humanitarian and the founder of Lila Poonawalla Foundation
Kala Prakash, fiction writer
Moti Prakash, poet
Chandru Raheja, property developer
Sushil Rajpal, Indian cameraman, producer, director
Bhagat Kanwar Ram, saint
Bulo C Rani, Indian music director
Gulabrai Ramchand, Indian cricketer
Ishwardas Rohani, Indian politician and former Speaker of Madhya Pradesh Legislative Assembly
G. S. Sainani, Indian general physician, medical researcher, medical writer and an Emeritus Professor of the National Academy of Medical Sciences
Meera Sanyal (née Hiranandani), was an Indian banker and politician. She served as CEO and chairperson of the Royal Bank of Scotland in India
Aftab Shivdasani, Indian film actor
Hari Shivdasani, film director and actor
Sadhana Shivdasani, Indian film actress
Sonu Shivdasani, founder and CEO of Soneva
Ranveer Singh, Indian actor
G. P. Sippy, Bollywood movie producer and director
Ramesh Sippy, Bollywood movie producer and director
Sobhraj Nirmaldas Sujansingani, writer and poet
Anjana Sukhani, actress
Dalip Tahil Indian film, television and theatre actor
Radhakrishna Hariram Tahiliani, Former Chief of the Naval Staff, India
Tarun Tahiliani, Indian fashion designer
Hiten Tejwani, Indian actor
Sundri Uttamchandani, Indian writer
Sunil Vaswani, chairman of the Stallion Group
Harchandrai Vishandas, British Indian attorney, politician and former mayor of Karachi
Romesh Wadhwani, chairman and CEO of Symphony Technology Group (STG), an alumnus of Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Sudhir, Film Actor
Tulsi Ramsey, filmmaker
Shyam Ramsey, filmmaker
F U Ramsay, filmmaker
Kumar Ramsay, filmmaker
Arjun Ramsay, filmmaker
Keshu Ramsay, filmmaker
Kiran Ramsay, filmmaker
Mac Mohan, film actor
Raj Kiran, film actor
Shiela Ramani, film actor
Govind Nihalani, filmmaker
Pahalaj Nihalani, filmmaker
Arjun Hingorani, filmmaker
Bhagwanti Navani, singer
Master Chandur, singer


== See also ==
Sindhis
Hinduism in Sindh Province
Sindhis in India
Hinduism in Pakistan
Darya Lal Mandir


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Sources ==
Bherumal Mahirchand Advani, "Amilan-jo-Ahwal" - published in Sindhi, 1919
Amilan-jo-Ahwal (1919) - translated into English in 2016 ("A History of the Amils") at sindhis