archive.today (formerly archive.is) is a web archiving website that saves snapshots on demand. It has support for JavaScript-heavy sites such as Google Maps and Twitter. Archive.today records two snapshots: one replicates the original webpage including any functional live links; the other is a screenshot of the page.


== History ==
Archive.today was founded in 2012. The site originally branded itself as archive.today, but changed the primary mirror to archive.is in May 2015. It began to deprecate the archive.is domain in favor of other mirrors in January 2019.  As of 2021, archive.today had saved about 500 million pages.
On October 30, 2025, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) subpoenaed Archive.today's domain registrar, Tucows. The subpoena stated its purpose is to identify the owner(s) of the archive.today domain name, and that it was part of a criminal investigation conducted by the FBI, the nature of which was not disclosed.


== Features ==

Archive.today can capture individual pages in response to explicit user requests. Since its beginning, it has supported crawling pages with URLs containing the now-deprecated hash-bang fragment (#!).
Archive.today records only text and images, excluding XML, RTF, spreadsheet (xls or ods) and other non-static content. However, videos for certain sites, like Twitter, are saved. It keeps track of the history of snapshots saved, requesting confirmation before adding a new snapshot of an already saved page.
Pages are captured at a browser width of 1,024 pixels. CSS is converted to inline CSS, removing responsive web design and selectors such as :hover and :active. Content generated using JavaScript during the crawling process appears in a frozen state.
HTML class names are preserved inside the old-class attribute.
When text is selected, a JavaScript applet generates a URL fragment seen in the browser's address bar that automatically highlights that portion of the text when visited again.
Web pages can be duplicated from archive.today to web.archive.org as second-level backup, but archive.today does not save its snapshots in WARC format. The reverse—from web.archive.org to archive.today—is also possible, but the copy usually takes more time than a direct capture. Historically, website owners had the option to opt out of Wayback Machine through the use of the robots exclusion standard (robots.txt), and these exclusions were also applied retroactively. Archive.today does not obey robots.txt because it acts "as a direct agent of the human user." As of 2019, the Wayback Machine also no longer obeys robots.txt.
The research toolbar enables advanced keywords operators, using * as the wildcard character. A couple of quotation marks address the search to an exact sequence of keywords present in the title or in the body of the webpage, whereas the insite operator restricts it to a specific Internet domain.
Once a web page is archived, it cannot be deleted directly by any Internet user.
Removing advertisements, popups or expanding links from archived pages is possible by asking the owner to do it on his blog.
While saving a dynamic list, archive.today search box shows only a result that links the previous and the following section of the list (e.g. 20 links for page). The other web pages saved are filtered, and sometimes may be found by one of their occurrences.
The search feature is backed by Google CustomSearch. If it delivers no results, archive.today attempts to utilize Yandex Search.
While saving a page, a list of URLs for individual page elements and their content sizes, HTTP statuses and MIME types is shown. This list can only be viewed during the crawling process.
Users can download archived pages as a ZIP file, except pages archived since 29 November 2019, when archive.today changed their browser engine from PhantomJS to Chromium (non-headless).
In July 2013, Archive.today began supporting the API of the Memento Project at Los Alamos National Laboratory. Due to budget constraints at LANL, the Memento Project was disestablished in September 2025.


== Worldwide availability ==


=== Australia and New Zealand ===

In March 2019, the site was blocked for six months by several internet providers in Australia and New Zealand in the aftermath of the Christchurch mosque shootings in an attempt to limit distribution of the footage of the attack.


=== China ===

According to GreatFire.org, archive.today has been blocked in mainland China since March 2016, archive.li since September 2017, archive.fo since July 2018, as well as archive.ph since December 2019.


=== Finland ===
On 21 July 2015, the operators blocked access to the service from all Finnish IP addresses, stating on Twitter that they did this in order to avoid escalating a dispute they allegedly had with the Finnish government.


=== Russia ===

In 2016, the Russian communications agency Roskomnadzor began blocking access to archive.is from Russia.


== Cloudflare DNS availability ==
Since May 2018 Cloudflare's 1.1.1.1 DNS service would not resolve archive.today's web addresses, making it inaccessible to users of the Cloudflare DNS service. Both organizations claimed the other was responsible for the issue. Cloudflare staff stated that the problem was on archive.today's DNS infrastructure, as its authoritative nameservers return invalid records when Cloudflare's network systems made requests to archive.today. archive.today countered that the issue was due to Cloudflare requests not being compliant with DNS standards, as Cloudflare does not send EDNS Client Subnet information in its DNS requests.


== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
FAQ at Archive.today
archive.today at Archive Team wiki
"archive.today: On the trail of the mysterious guerrilla archivist of the Internet", Gyrovague, 5 August 2023