video onk

The Hindi blogosphere refers to web blogs and posts in the Hindi language originating from India, usually the Hindi Belt. This forms a significant segment of the broader Indian blogosphere. 


== History ==
Alok Kumar is recognized as the pioneer of Hindi blogging. His blog नौ दौ ग्यारह (literally: nine two eleven) was the first known Hindi blog. He introduced the term Chittha (Hindi: चिट्ठा) for blog. This term was quickly adopted by other bloggers and later became the standard Hindi term for blog. Because of the difficulties involved in typing Hindi script, very few people used blogs. However, as the availability of Hindi typing tools increased, the number of Hindi bloggers began to grow.
From 2007, the number of Hindi blogs increased rapidly. This was due to the advent of Indic Unicode support in various blogging services, the introduction of new Hindi typing tools like Google Indic Transliteration tool in Blogger, and the promotion of Hindi blogging by mainstream media.


== Women in Hindi blogging ==
Women have played a significant role in the Hindi blogging community. By April 2013, the Hindi blogosphere comprised over 50,000 blogs, with approximately 25% (12,500) authored by female bloggers.


== Types of blogs ==
In the early stages, most Hindi blogs were personal in nature, with only a limited number focused on specific topics and interests. As of 2007, the number of Hindi blogs increased rapidly, and blogs began covering various topics such as cinema, technology, science, hobbies, and photography. In 2010, The Wall Street Journal started a Hindi blog called India Real Time, that subsequently ended in 2017, which covered news, sports, Bollywood, politics, and business.


== Blog literary award ==

The Parikalpna Award is a literary award for blogs in India. It is presented by the magazine Parikalpnaa Samay and the company Parikalpnaa.


== Events ==

The First International Hindi Blogger Conference was inaugurated by the Chief Minister of Uttarakhand, Ramesh Pokhariyal Nishank in New Delhi on 30 April 2011. The celebration session was chaired by Ashok Chakradhar, Dr. Ramdarash Mishra, Prabhakar Shrotriy, Ravindra Prabhat and Vishwa Bandhu Gupta.
The second Hindi Bloggers Conference was inaugurated by the Senior Indian Journalist Mudrarakshas in Lucknow on 27 August 2012. The celebration session was chaired by Shailendra Sagar, Birendra Yadav, Udbhrant, Rakesh Veda, Sudhakar Adeeb, Ravindra Prabhat and Dr. Subhaash Ray.
The third International Bloggers Conference was inaugurated by the Senior leader of Nepali Congress Party and ex-cabinet minister of Nepal, Mr. Arjun Narasingha K.C. in Kathmandu, Nepal. It started on 13 September 2013 and concluded on 15 September 2013. Parallel online contributions were made by other participants. This three-day celebration session was chaired by Nepali, Hindi, Bhojpuri, Awadhi, Maithili, Chhattisgarhi writers and folklore scholars such as Mr. Kumud Adhikari, Suman Pokhrel, Uma Suvedi, Sanat Regmi, Vikram Mani Tripathi, Ravindra Prabhat, Dr. Rama Dwivedi, Dr. Sampatdevi Muraraka, K.K. Yadav, Akanksha Yadav, Girish Pankaj, Lalit Sharma, B.S. Pawala, Dr. Ram Bahadur Mishra, Shailesh Bharatvasi, Mukesh Kumar Sinha, Mukesh Tiwari, Manoj Bhavuk, Saroj Suman, Vinay Prajapati, Sunita Prem Yadav etc. 
The fourth International Bloggers Conference was inaugurated by the Secretary General of the Bhutan Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Fub Shring, in Thimphu, Bhutan, starting on 16 January 2015 and concluding on 18 January 2015. This three-day celebration session was chaired by the Deputy Secretary General of the Bhutan Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Chandra Kshetri, Chairperson of the Women's Wing of the SAARC Committee and the International School of Bhutan; Thinley Lham, Chairman of the Linguistics Department at Assam University in Silchar; Professor Nityanand Pandey, Director of Indian Postal Services, Allahabad region; Krishna Kumar Yadav; and Senior Hindi Satirist Girish Pankaj.
The fifth International Bloggers Conference was inaugurated by the senior dramatist in Sri Lanka Somrathne Withana, and Ex Cabinet Minister of the Uttar Pradesh government Nakul Dubey in Sri Lanka's capital Colombo and cultural capital Kand,y on 23 May 2015 and concluded on 27 May. It was chaired by Director Postaof l Service, Rajasthan west Region, Jodhpur, Krishna Kumar Yadav, Hea; of the Hindi Department and Uttr Maharashtra University Jalgaon, Sunil Kulkarni and ;Chief Editor of Parikalpana Samay and organizer of 'Intethe rnational Bloggers Conference’ Sen,ior Hindi satirist Ravindra Prabhat.


== See also ==
Blogosphere
Indic computing


== References ==


== External links ==