The International Internet Preservation Consortium is an international organization of libraries and other organizations established to coordinate efforts to preserve internet content for the future.  It was founded in July 2003 by 12 participating institutions, and had grown to 35 members by January 2010. As of January 2022, there are 52 members.
Membership is open to archives, museums, libraries (including national libraries), and cultural heritage institutions.


== Members ==


=== National libraries ===
Participating national libraries and archives include:

Austrian National Library
Biblioteca Nacional de España
Bibliotheca Alexandrina (Egypt)
Bibliothèque et Archives nationales du Québec
Bibliothèque nationale de France
British Library
German National Library
Library and Archives Canada
Library of Congress
National and University Library in Zagreb
National and University Library of Iceland
National and University Library of Slovenia
National Diet Library (Japan)
National Library Board of Singapore
National Library of Australia
National Library of Catalonia
National Library of Chile
National Library of China
National Library of the Czech Republic
National Library of Estonia
National Library of Finland
National Library of Greece
National Library of Ireland
National Library of Korea
National Library of Latvia
National Library of Luxembourg
National Library of the Netherlands
National Library of New Zealand
National Library of Norway
National Library of Poland
National Library of Scotland
National Library of Serbia
National Library of Sweden
National Széchényi Library
Polish State Archives
Swiss National Library
The National Archives (United Kingdom)
The Royal Danish Library
Royal Library of Belgium


=== Participating organisations ===
Other participating organizations include:

Archiefweb.eu
Arquivo.pt - Portuguese Web Archive
Columbia University Libraries
Hanzo
Harvard Library
Internet Archive
Institut national de l'audiovisuel
Los Alamos National Laboratory Research Library
Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision
Old Dominion University Department of Computer Science
Stanford University Libraries
University Library, Bratislava
University of North Texas Libraries


=== Past members ===
WebCite used to be, but is no longer, a member of the IIPC. In a 2012 message, its founder Gunther Eysenbach commented that "WebCite has no funding, and IIPC charges 4000 Euro/yr in membership fees."


== Projects ==
The IIPC sponsors and collaborates on a number of different projects with its member organizations.


=== Current projects ===
Support for transitioning to pywb (Python Wayback).
Collaborative Collections: IIPC members are collaborating to build public web archive collections based on transnational themes or events of mutual interest. Topics of existing collections include: European Refugee Crisis, Intergovernmental Organizations, Olympics, World War I Commemoration, Climate Change, Artificial Intelligence, and Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19).
Memento: aggregate metadata of the IIPC archives and provide access to Memento.
IIPC also maintains an electronic mailing list open to anyone interested in issues associated with web harvesting, archiving, and quality maintenance issues.


=== Past projects ===
Developing Bloom Filters for Web Archives’ Holdings.
Improving the Dark and Stormy Archives Framework by Summarizing the Collections of the National Library of Australia
LinkGate: Core Functionality and Future Use Cases.
Asking questions with web archives – introductory notebooks for historians: The project output is a set of 16 Jupyter notebooks that demonstrate how specific historical research questions can be explored by analysing data from web archives.
IIPC sponsored a project on "cross-archival search strategies" which included the creation of an archive focused on the 2010 Winter Olympics.
Starting in 2006, the National Library of New Zealand and the British Library developed the Web Curator Tool, an open-source workflow management system for selective web archiving. Since 2017 the Royal Library of the Netherlands has collaboratively developed the tool with the National Library of New Zealand. Version 3.2.1 was released in August 2024, and is available at GitHub. The Web Curator Tool is built upon Java and utilizes Internet Archive’s technology, the Heritrix web archiving crawler, and replay tools such as OpenWayback and Pywb.
IIPC Web Archiving Doctoral Support Award: grant to provide three years of funding for a student to earn a PhD in Interdisciplinary Information Science at The University of North Texas College of Information.
IIPC Member Staff Exchange: onsite training by experts for participating IIPC members to use Heritrix 3 web crawler.
Working group on Statistics and Quality Indicators for Web Archiving: development of guidelines on the management and evaluation of Web archiving activities and products.


== References ==


== External links ==
International Internet Preservation Consortium