Jatheon Technologies is a Canadian data archiving company based in Toronto, Ontario, founded in 2004. It provides AI-enabled products for capturing, archiving, and reviewing communications data like email, social media, files, text messages and content from chat apps and collaboration platforms.. The company focuses on highly regulated industries, including government, financial services, healthcare, education, oil, energy, and insurance. Jatheon’s solutions help organizations meet ediscovery, regulatory compliance, public records, and data governance requirements.


== History ==
Two years after it was founded, in 2006, Jatheon Technologies was named one of the “Top 10 Companies to Watch” by Deloitte. 
In December 2009, the company announced a partnership with Dell. Under the partnership, four new products combining Dell’s PowerEdge R610 and R710 server technology, Dell’s PowerVault MD1000 storage arrays, and Jatheon’s email archiving and management software in various virtual storage configurations were launched.
The company later redesigned its on-premises email archiving products (June 2014).
Over time, Jatheon has expanded its archiving capabilities to include more types of unstructured data. 
In 2017, it launched functionality for archiving social media and mobile communications. The company shifted toward cloud-based solutions in 2018 with the release of Jatheon Cloud, which supports the archiving of email, chat apps, online collaboration platforms, social media, and files. 
Its cloud service continued to grow, with the addition of Zoom video meeting archiving in February 2024. This expansion was further supported by Jatheon joining the Amazon Web Services (AWS) Partner Network (APN) later that year. 
In 2025, Jatheon announced a company-wide, AI-first transformation, with a renewed focus on AI innovation across its products and internal processes. As part of this initiative, the company introduced its AI-enabled archive, which incorporates new AI features into multiple compliance and data search functions. The company’s commitment to being AI-first is reflected in its future-ready compliance tools, which include proactive alerts and proactive surveillance, designed to help organizations meet evolving regulatory requirements.


== Awards and Certifications ==
Jatheon has received recognition and certifications from various industry groups.

Listed as a “Champion” and awarded the “Value Award” in Info-Tech Research Group’s 2012 Email Archiving report.
Listed in the 2022 Gartner’s Magic Quadrant for Enterprise Information Archiving.
In 2024, Jatheon was certified for compliance with key data privacy and security standards, including GDPR, ISO 27001, SOC 2 Type II, and HIPAA.
The Radicati Group named Jatheon a “Trail Blazer” in its 2024 Market Quadrant for Information Archiving.
The Radicati Group upgraded Jatheon’s position to a “Top Player” in its 2025 Market Quadrant for Information Archiving.


== Acquisitions ==
In June 2009, the company acquired the ongoing operations and support services of NorthSeas AMT customers.
In 2010, Jatheon acquired the operations of TrendMicro.


== References ==