A web directory is a listing of websites organized in a hierarchy or interconnected list of categories.
The following is a list of notable web directory services.


== General ==
DOAJ.org – Directory of Open Access Journals
Curlie.org (formerly DMOZ, also known as Open Directory Project – the largest directory of the Web. Its open content has been mirrored at many sites. The original DMOZ went offline in March 2017, but continued since August 2018 as Curlie.
Jasmine Directory - Lists websites by topic and by region, specializing in business websites.
Sources – Web portal for journalists, freelance writers, editors, authors, and researchers; in addition to a search engine it includes a subject-based directory.
World Wide Web Virtual Library (VLIB) – Was the first directory of the Web, and operated from 1991–2005.


== Business directories ==
Business.com – Integrated directory of knowledge resources and companies, that charges a fee for listing review and operates as a pay per click search engine.
Yell –  is a digital marketing and online directory business in the United Kingdom


== Niche ==
Library and Archival Exhibitions on the Web – international database of online exhibitions which is a service of the Smithsonian Institution Libraries.
Virtual Library museums pages – directory of museum websites around the world.


== Regional ==
2345.com – Chinese web directory founded in 2005. The website is the second most used web directory in China.
Alleba – Filipino search engine website, with directory.
Timway – web portal and directory primarily serving Hong Kong.


== Defunct directories ==
AboutUs.org – directory from 2005 to 2013.
Anime Web Turnpike – was a web directory founded in August 1995 by Jay Fubler Harvey. It served as a large database of links to various anime and manga websites.
Biographicon – directory of biographical entries.
Google Directory – copy of DMOZ directory, with sites listed in PageRank order within each category. Closed in July 2011.
Internet Public Library – librarian-edited directory, product of a merger with the Librarians' Internet Index (LII) in 2010. Closed in June 2015.
Intute – directory of websites for study and research. Maintenance stopped in July 2011, archives remain available.
LookSmart – operated several vertical directories from 1995 to 2006.
Lycos' TOP 5% – from 1995 until 2000 it aimed to list the Web's top 5% of Websites.
Yahoo! Directory– first service that Yahoo! offered. Closed in December 2014.
Yahoo! Kids – oldest online search directory for children, until its discontinuation as of April 30, 2013.
Zeal – volunteer-built Web directory; it was introduced in 1999, acquired by LookSmart in 2000, and shut down in 2006.
ProgrammableWeb – resource on APIs that provides a directory of APIs.
Dalilmasr – Egyptian online directory


== See also ==
List of search engines
Shopping directory