"American-born confused desi" (ABCD) is an informal term used to refer to South Asian Americans, particularly of Indian, Pakistani, or Bangladeshi origin, born or raised in the United States, in contrast to those who were born overseas and later settled in the US.


== Neologism ==

"ABCD" or "American-born confused desi" has become a polarizing factor in the South Asian diaspora in the United States, with first-generation immigrant parents and young South Asians of second or later generations. Though the term was originally coined in reference to Indian Americans, it has been adopted by the South Asian diaspora at large. The term desi comes from the Hindi word देश (deś, lit. 'homeland').  The word has its origin in Sanskrit, deśa, and is pronounced desh in the Bengali language. Desi means 'of the homeland' and is generally used by diasporas of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. The phrase is not frequently used in South Asia and not seen as a set identity as it is seen by diasporas. The term has been commonly known among diasporas since at least the 1980s. The term confused is used to describe the psychological state of many second-generation South Asian Americans who struggle to balance values and traditions taught at home with attitudes and practices that are more conducive to the culture of The United States.
The longer and lesser known form American born confused desi, emigrated from Gujarat, house in Jersey is also occasionally seen; playing on the alphabet theme, it has been expanded for K-Z variously as kids learning medicine, now owning property, quite reasonable salary, two uncles visiting, white Xenophobia, yet zestful or keeping lotsa motels, named Omkarnath Patel, quickly reaching success through underhanded vicious ways, xenophobic yet zestful. The former version of the A—Z expansion was proposed by South Asian immigrants as a reaction to the latter version that derogated them.


== Cultural implications ==
Among South Asian Americans, the term may be considered divisive, as first generation South Asian Americans use it to criticize the Americanization and the lack of belonging to Indian Asian culture they perceive in their second-generation peers or children. At times, it could also be used to mock their outdated perception of their country of origin. Writer Vijay Prashad describes the term as "ponderous and overused" and notes it as one of the mechanisms by which new immigrants attempt to make second-generation youth feel "culturally inadequate and unfinished".


== Movies ==
The term American-born confused desi appeared in the 1999 movie ABCD, directed by Krutin Patel and written by James McManus and Krutin Patel. It stars Madhur Jaffrey, who was also a producer, as the mother desperate to "see her son and rebellious daughter married off to respectable Indian Families." The term appeared in the movie American Desi (2001). ABCD: American-Born Confused Desi is a 2013 Malayalam language movie released in India. The film narrates the journey of two young American Malayalis to their motherland, Kerala, with the title based on the term American-born confused desi. The film was remade in Telugu in 2019 with the same name.


== Other use ==
Abroad-born confused desi, an informal term used to refer to members of the South Asian diaspora who were born or raised abroad.


== See also ==
American-born Chinese (ABC)


== References ==


== Further reading ==
V., Smitha (2002-03-05), "ABCDs: American Born Confused Desis", Boloji.com, retrieved 2008-04-17
Hidier, Tanuja Desai (2002), Born Confused, New York: Scholastic Press, ISBN 0-439-35762-4
Kurella, Vidya (April 2005), "From Confused to Confident: How do you say your name?", ABCDlady: A Magazine for the American Born Confident Desi, retrieved 2008-04-17
Hoque, Maher (Fall 2006), "A Former Coconut's Guide to Getting Cultured", Sapna Magazine Online, archived from the original on September 28, 2007, retrieved 2008-04-17
Ojha, Ajay K., Humor: A distinctive way of speaking that can create cultural identity, Journal of Intercultural Communication Research, p. 161, Vol. 32, No. 3, September 2003.
Souter, Kay; Raja, Ira (January 2008), "Mothering Siblings: Diaspora, Desire and Identity in American Born Confused Desi" (PDF), Narrative, 16 (1), The Ohio State University Press: 16–28, doi:10.1353/nar.2008.0002, S2CID 161480631, retrieved 2008-04-17
George, Sam (May 2006), Understanding the Coconut Generation