'Asabiyyah (Arabic: عصبيّة, romanized: ʿaṣabiyya, also 'asabiyya, 'group feeling' or 'social cohesion') is a concept of social solidarity with an emphasis on unity, group consciousness, and a sense of shared purpose and social cohesion, originally primarily used in the context of tribalism and clanism. In the modern period, it is generally analogous to solidarity. However, it is often negatively associated because it can widely used in ethnically and linguistically nationalism or partisanship, i.e., loyalty to one's group regardless of circumstances.
The concept was familiar in the pre-Islamic era, but became popularized in Ibn Khaldun's Muqaddimah, in which it is described as the fundamental bond of human society and the basic motive force of history, pure only in its nomadic form. Ibn Khaldun argued that asabiyya is cyclical and directly relevant to the rise and fall of civilizations: it is strongest at the start of a civilization, declines as the civilization advances, and then another more compelling asabiyyah eventually takes its place to help establish a different civilization.


== Overview ==

Ibn Khaldun describes asabiyya as the bond of cohesion among humans in a group-forming community. The bond exists at any level of civilization, from nomadic society to states and empires. Asabiyyah is strongest in the nomadic phase, and decreases as civilization advances. As this declines, another more compelling asabiyyah may take its place; thus, civilizations rise and fall, and history describes these cycles as they play out.
Ibn Khaldun argued that some dynasty (or civilization) has within itself the seeds of its own downfall. He explains that ruling houses tend to emerge on the peripheries of existing empires and use the much stronger asabiyya present in their areas to their advantage, in order to bring about a change in leadership. This implies that the new rulers are at first considered 'barbarians' in comparison to the previous ones. As they establish themselves at the center of their empire, they become increasingly lax, less coordinated, disciplined and watchful, and more concerned with maintaining their new power and lifestyle. Their asabiyya dissolves into factionalism and individualism, diminishing their capacity as a political unit. Conditions are thus created wherein a new dynasty can emerge at the periphery of their control, grow strong, and effect a change in leadership, continuing the cycle. Ibn Khaldun also further states in the Muqaddimah that "dynasties have a natural life span like individuals", and that no dynasty generally lasts beyond three generations of about 40 years each.


== See also ==
Tribalism
Ethnocentrism
Social cycle theory
Historic recurrence
Guilt–shame–fear spectrum of cultures
Superpower collapse


== Notes ==


== References ==


=== Citations ===


=== Bibliography ===
Alatas, Syed Farid (2006), "A Khaldunian Exemplar for a Historical Sociology for the South", Current Sociology, 54 (3): 397–411, doi:10.1177/0011392106063189, S2CID 145204449
Durkheim, Émile. [1893] 1997. The Division of Labor in Society. New York: The Free Press. ISBN 0-684-83638-6
Gabrieli, F. 1930. Il concetto della 'asabiyyah nel pensiero storico di Ibn Khaldun, Atti della R. Accad. delle scienze di Torino, lxv
Gellner, Ernest (2007), "Cohesion and Identity: the Maghreb from Ibn Khaldun to Emile Durkheim", Government and Opposition, 10 (2): 203–18, doi:10.1111/j.1477-7053.1975.tb00637.x, S2CID 145595632
Ibn Khaldun. The Muqaddimah Archived 2021-04-13 at the Wayback Machine, translated by F. Rosenthal.


== Further reading ==
Ahmed, Akbar S. 2003. Islam under siege: living dangerously in a post-honor world. Cambridge: Polity.
Korotayev, Andrey. 2006. Secular Cycles and Millennial Trends in Africa. Moscow: URSS.
Turchin, Peter. 2003. Historical Dynamics: Why States Rise and Fall. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.


== External links ==
Asabiyya: Re-Interpreting Value Change in Globalized Societies