Estonianisation is the changing of one's personal names from another language into Estonian. Less often, the term has also been applied to various programmes and initiatives by academic and state institutions to promote education in the language, culture, and Estonian national identity. 


== Family names ==

Before 1918, when Estonia became an independent country, around half of the country's ethnic Estonian population carried foreign language (mostly German names) or "foreign-sounding", i.e. non-Estonian surnames. In the 1920s, and especially in the 1930s, the government promoted a nationwide voluntary campaign for the Estonianisation of personal names. During the campaign about 200.000 of Estonian citizens chose a new surname to replace their original family name. A smaller part of the people also Estonianised their first name(s) at the same time. A similar process (Finnicization) took place in Finland in the early 20th century. 
The Estonianisation of names stopped almost completely after the Soviet occupation and annexation of Estonia in 1940. The process has continued since Estonia restored independence in 1991.   


=== Notable people with Estonianised names ===
Paul Berg → Paul Ariste
Karl August Einbund → Kaarel Eenpalu
Erhard-Voldemar Esperk → Ants Eskola
Miina Hermann → Miina Härma
August Jürmann → August Jürima
Aleksander Klumberg → Aleksander Kolmpere
Hans Kurvits → Ants Kurvits
Hans Laipman → Ants Laikmaa
Teodor Lipman → Teodor Lippmaa
Friedebert Michelson → Friedebert Tuglas
Hans Oidermann → Ants Oidermaa
Jüri Parinbach → Jüri Parijõgi
Kuno Preis → Kuno Pajula
Karp Ristikivi → Karl Ristikivi
Johannes Schmuul → Juhan Smuul
Arnold Sööberg → Arnold Soinla
Veljo Sturm → Veljo Tormis
Grigori Tõnisson → Vello Agori
Kristjan Trossmann → Kristjan Palusalu
Konstantin	Türnbaum → Konstantin Türnpu
Richard Vreeman → Richard Veermaa
Some ethnic Russians who Estonianised their names:

Alexey Dolgoshev → Aleksis Rannit
Georgi Kuznetsov → Jüri Järvet
Vassili Krassikov → Vello Kaaristo


== Integration ==
After the end of the 1944–1991 Soviet occupation of Estonia, following the restoration of the country's full independence in 1991, the Estonian government has pursued an "integration policy" (informally referred to as "Estonianisation") that has been aimed at the strengthening of Estonian identity among the population, to develop shared values and "pride in being a citizen of Estonia"; with respect and acceptance of cultural differences among the residents of Estonia.


=== Education ===
On 14 March 2000 the Government of Estonia adopted the "State Programme: Integration in Estonian society 2000–2007". The main focus areas and aims of integration as defined by the state programme are linguistic-communicative, legal-political and socio-economical. The programme has four sub-programmes: education, the education and culture of national minorities, the teaching of Estonian to adults and social competence. The aims of the sub-programmes are to be achieved via learning of the Estonian language by children and adults.


== See also ==
List of people with Estonianised names
Campaign for the Estonianisation of personal names (1920—1940)
et:Perekonnanimede kaitseregister, official Estonian Family Name Protection Register
Lists of most common surnames in European countries § Estonia


== References ==


== External links ==
Database of Estonianised Surnames 1919–1940 (at National Archives)