The Intergovernmental Group of Twenty-Four on International Monetary Affairs and Development, or The Group of 24 (G-24) was established in 1971 as a chapter of the Group of 77 in order to help coordinate the positions of developing countries on international monetary and development finance issues, as well as and to ensure that their interests are adequately represented in negotiations on international monetary matters. Though originally named after the number of founding Member States, it now has 28 Members (plus China, which acts as a Special Invitee). Although the G-24 officially has 28 member countries, any member of the G-77 can join discussions. By the 1st of November 2025, Nigeria, will assume the chairmanship of the Group. 
Although the group is not an organ of the International Monetary Fund, the IMF provides secretariat services for the Group. It meets biannually, first prior to the International Monetary and Financial Committee, and secondly prior to the Joint Ministerial Committee of the Boards of Governors of the Bank and the Fund. These meetings allow developing country members to discuss agenda items prior to these important meetings of the IMF/World Bank.


== Member states ==
Following is the list of members of G-24:
Region I (Africa):

 Algeria
 DR Congo
 Egypt
 Ethiopia
 Gabon
 Ghana
 Ivory Coast
 Kenya
 Morocco
 Nigeria
 South Africa
Region II (Latin America and the Caribbean): 

 Argentina
 Brazil
 Colombia
 Ecuador
 Guatemala
 Haiti
 Mexico
 Peru
 Trinidad and Tobago
 Venezuela
Region III (Asia):

 China
 India
 Iran
 Lebanon
 Pakistan
 Philippines
 Sri Lanka
 Syria


=== Observers ===
The following act as observers states of the G-24:

 Angola
 Indonesia
 Saudi Arabia
 United Arab Emirates
The following act as institutional observers of the G-24:

Arab Monetary Fund
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
Group of 77
International Labour Organization
Islamic Development Bank
OPEC Fund for International Development
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
South Centre
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
Central American Monetary Council


== Organization ==
The G-24 operates at two levels:

The political level, consisting of Ministers, their Deputies, the Bureau, and other Washington-based representatives who participate in the Committee of the Whole and in any ad hoc meetings; and
The operational level, which is run by the G-24 Liaison Office, and includes the G-24 Secretariat and the Research Coordinator.
The governing body of the G-24 meets twice a year, preceding the Spring and Fall meetings of the International Monetary and Financial Committee and the Joint Development Committee of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The plenary G-24 meetings are addressed by the heads of the IMF and the World Bank Group as well as by senior officials of the UN system. Issues are first discussed by the Deputies and culminate at the Ministerial level by the approval of a document that sets out the consensus views of member countries. The Ministerial document is released as a public Communiqué at a press conference held at the end of the meetings. Decision-making within the G-24 is by consensus.


== Leadership ==


=== Political leadership ===
The following compose the political leadership of the Group:

Chair: Adama Coulibaly, Minister of Finance, Côte d'Ivoire
First Vice-Chair: Benjamin E. Diokno, Secretary of Finance, Philippines
Second Vice-Chair: Sergio Massa, Minister of Treasury, Argentina


=== Secretariat ===
The G-24 Secretariat is a permanent body that serves as the administrative organ of the G-24. It is based in Washington D.C. in the IMF Headquarters. The functions and activities of the Secretariat include: ensuring effective liaison among G-24 members with a view of facilitating consensus on issues of common interest; overseeing and implementing the work program; building strategic partnerships and coalitions with other fora engaged in the same spheres of interest; and supporting the Chair and the Bureau by providing logistical and secretarial support for the various meetings of the G-24.
Until 1997, the Research Program of the Group was the operational organ for the coordination of members' policy positions. The program was headed by a Research Coordinator that directs the policy outputs of the organization. Past research coordinators include Sidney S. Dell (British), 1975-1990; Gary Helleiner (Canada), 1990-1997. With the formalization of the establishment of the Secretariat in 1997 and absorption of the Research program into the Secretariat function, subsequent research coordinators included the Turkish economist Dani Rodrik (2002) and Malaysian economist Jomo Sundaram (2006–2012).
The Secretariat is headed by a Director, who, since 1997, also manages the G-24’s Research Program.
Current and past Directors are:


=== Chair ===
The following is the list of former and current Chairs of the G-24:


== Research and publications ==
The Group also maintains a research and work program that revolves around issues of importance to developing countries. In particular, the program focuses on three key areas: The global economy and growth agenda, international financial architecture, and financing for development. The global economy and growth agenda emphasizes structural transformation, trade and technology, and inequality. international financial architecture covers reform and governance of global financial institutions, the global financial safety net and managing capital flows, and financial regulation. financing for development includes taxation and international tax cooperation, infrastructure financing, debt management and sustainability, and financial inclusion. Much of the group's research, including books, policy briefs and working papers can be found on its website.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official site