Inclusive capitalism, or stakeholder capitalism, is a theoretical concept and policy movement that seeks to address the growing income inequality and wealth inequality within Western capitalism following the 2008 financial crisis.


== Contemporary understanding ==
Robert Ashford argues that the concept of inclusive capitalism is rooted in the postulates of the binary economics.
C. K. Prahalad opens his 2005 book The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty Through Profits by asking “Why can’t we create inclusive capitalism”. He uses the term “inclusive capitalism” to invite readers to focus on underserved consumers and markets in order to create opportunity for all.


== Implementation ==
In 2012, the Henry Jackson Society created an Inclusive Capitalism Initiative task force in order to start a transatlantic conversation about the growing income inequalities and their threat to the capitalist system.
In 2014, Conference on Inclusive Capitalism, co-hosted by the City of London and E. L. Rothschild holding company, was held in London where the concept of inclusive capitalism was discussed as a practical measure. At another conference in 2015 the "Pathway to Action" was brainstormed. In the same 2015 year, the Coalition for Inclusive Capitalism was registered in the United States as a not-for-profit organization. Lynn Forester de Rothschild became the founding CEO of the Coalition. At the 2016 Conference on Inclusive Capitalism in New York City, participants expressed commitment to promote inclusive economic growth. Members of the Coalition expressed a belief that all stakeholders, including business and society, should be engaged in the enactment of an inclusive capitalism agenda
In 2019, the Embankment Project for Inclusive Capitalism (EPIC) undertaken by the Coalition together with Ernst & Young reported its findings in a white paper. It was a pioneering effort to "develop a framework and identify meaningful metrics to report on long-term and inclusive value creation activities that heretofore have not been captured on traditional financial statements".
In 2020, the Council for Inclusive Capitalism, a partnership of the Coalition with the Vatican, was created.


== Criticism ==
John Kay claims that most of the 21st-century businesses are already inclusive.
Nafeez Ahmed describes the Inclusive Capitalism Initiative as a Trojan Horse assembled to pacify the coming global revolt against capitalism.


== See also ==
Community capitalism
Humanistic capitalism
Neo-Capitalism
Progressive capitalism
Green capitalism
Pink capitalism
Purple capitalism
Binary economics
Inclusive growth
Creating shared value
Corporate social responsibility
Redwashing


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Farmer, Paul (2003). Pathologies of Power: Health, Human Rights, and the New War on the Poor. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 9780520235502.
Goode, Judith; Maskovsky, Jeff (2001). The New Poverty Studies: The Ethnography of Power, Politics, and Impoverished People in the United States. New York: New York University Press.
Hammond, Allen L. and C. K. Prahalad (2004). Selling to the Poor, Foreign Policy, 142:30-37.
Hammond, Allen L., William J. Kramer, Robert S. Katz, Julia T. Tran, Courtland Walker (2007). The Next 4 Billion: Market Size and Business Strategy at the Base of the Pyramid Archived 2008-04-15 at the Wayback Machine. Accessed April 25, 2008.
O'Connor, Alice (2001). Poverty Knowledge: Social Science, Social Policy, and the Poor in Twentieth-Century U.S. History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Prahalad, C. K. and, Allen Hammond (2002). Serving the world's poor, profitably, Harvard Business Review, 80(9):48-58.
Yelvington, Kevin A. (1995). Producing Power: Ethnicity, Gender, and Class in a Caribbean Workplace. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.


== External links ==
Coalition for Inclusive Capitalism Archived 2021-01-18 at the Wayback Machine
Coalition for Inclusive Capitalism—Press Archived 2019-12-28 at the Wayback Machine
Inclusive Capitalism for the American Workforce: Reaping the Rewards of Economic Growth through Broad-based Employee Ownership and Profit Sharing, Center for American Progress, 2011
The State and Direction of Inclusive Capitalism, Saïd Business School, Oxford University—Deloitte Consulting, LLP
David G. Green. Inclusive Capitalism: How we can make independence work for everyone, Civitas: Institute for the Study of Civil Society, 2017
 Data related to Inclusive capitalism at Wikidata