Right-wing antiglobalism, also referred to as the antiglobalist right, is a political position opposing globalization, arguing national identities and economies are encroached on by incessant immigration. Instead, right-wing antiglobalists support nationalism as a cure for the alleged problems caused by the globalization. Right-wing antiglobalism protests against the United Nations (including its Sustainable Development Goals), 15-minute cities, and COVID-19 vaccines as being created or promoted by globalists.
Right-wing antiglobalists frequently use the term globalist as a pejorative and in various conspiracy theories, notably linking with the New World Order conspiracy theory, and as a trope within the new antisemitism movement; although certain right-wing antiglobalist leaders, such as Donald Trump and Javier Milei, also hold pro-Israel principles.


== Background ==
From the late 1960s to the early 1980s, Liberty Lobby (and founder Willis Carto) and the John Birch Society, along with associated authors such as Gary Allen and Archibald Roberts, helped shape anti-internationalism into antiglobalism. The organizations became institutionalized as they outlasted many other far-right groups, becoming "ideological hubs"; their focus on spreading information through publications, such as The Spotlight, helped antiglobalism spread.
Among the Christian right, particularly the Protestant right, globalism is an umbrella term which includes perceived secular aspects such as environmentalism, feminism, and socialism; globalism is believed to underlie the expansion of the New World Order – a prophesied enemy attempting to thwart Christianity – through organizations such as the European Union, United Nations, and World Trade Organization. Globalist values, promoted by the UN as a whole and the World Health Organization, among others, are perceived to be at odds with Christian values. UN conventions on discrimination against women and children's rights have thus been fiercely opposed by organizations and leading figures on the Christian right, such as Concerned Women for America, as methods to weaken parental rights, destroy the traditional family, and separate children from their religious and familial settings. The UN as a satanic enemy is a theme in apocalyptic Christian media, such as the 1990s–2000s series Left Behind, in which the UN is run by the Antichrist, as well as Pat Robertson's 1991 New World Order and Hal Lindsey's 1994 book Planet Earth 2000 A.D.: Will Mankind Survive?.
Right-wing antiglobalism began to gain traction in the 2010s in countries like the United Kingdom and the United States, which were previously seen as major supporters of globalization. Before the 21st century, most of the critiques of globalism came from its impact on the Global South. In the 21st century, there have been increasing concerns about its effect on the Global North. Globalism has been criticized as leading to the outsourcing of jobs and cultural homogenization.


== Allegations of antisemitism ==

Followers of the QAnon conspiracy theory refer to what they term "the cabal" as a secret worldwide elite organization that wishes to undermine democracy and freedom and implement their globalist agendas. Hungary's prime minister Viktor Orbán has used antisemitic tropes in accusations against globalists, espousing a conspiracy theory of a world network controlled by Hungarian-American philanthropist George Soros. During the election and presidency of United States president Donald Trump, he and members of his administration used the term globalist on multiple occasions. The administration was accused of using the term as an antisemitic dog whistle, and to associate their critics with an international Jewish conspiracy.


== See also ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Kiely, Ray (2020). The Conservative Challenge to Globalization: Anglo-American Perspectives. Newcastle upon Tyne: Agenda Publishing. ISBN 978-1-78821-096-6.
Zahra, Tara (2023). Against the World: Anti-Globalism and Mass Politics Between the World Wars (1st ed.). New York: W.W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-39365-197-3.