The Sustainable Transport Award (STA) is presented annually to a city that has shown leadership and vision in the field of sustainable transportation and urban livability in the preceding year. Nominations are accepted from anyone, and winners and honorable mentions are chosen by the Sustainable Transport Award Steering Committee.
Since 2005, the award has been given out annually to a city or major jurisdiction that has implemented innovative transportation strategies, especially in several different areas of sustainable transportation. The award rewards cities for improving mobility for residents, reducing transportation greenhouse gas and air pollution emissions, and improving safety and access for bicyclists and pedestrians.The STA shows international interest in cities at the forefront of transportation policy. By highlighting successfully completed programs and emphasizing transferability, the award helps disseminate new ideas and best practices while encouraging cities worldwide to improve their own livability. 
Noteworthy projects include the construction or expansion of BRT or LRT systems, bike shares or bike lanes, attention to low-income access to transportation, reform of parking or zoning regulations, and linking transportation and development practices (TOD).


== Process ==


=== Criteria ===

STAs are awarded to cities that have demonstrated significant progress in using transportation to create a more sustainable and livable city. The Sustainable Transport Award looks for cities working in several of the following policy areas:

Improvements to public transportation, such as implementing a new mass transit system (e.g., bus rapid transit), expanding the existing systems to increase accessibility and coverage, or improving customer service.
Improvements to non-motorized travel, such as the implementation or expansion of bike share programs and bike lanes, the creation of pedestrian walkways, and improvements to street crossings and sidewalks.
Expansion or improvement of public space often includes the creation of open plazas, creating pedestrian-only zones, installing street lamps or trees along sidewalks, and pedestrian safety measures.
Implementation of travel demand management programs to reduce private car use can include car-free days or zones, changes to parking requirements or availability, the implementation or expansion of car share systems, congestion charging, and structured tolls and fees.
Reducing urban sprawl by linking transportation to development (TOD) can be done through changes to zoning laws and providing incentives to developers.
Reduction of transport-related air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions by creating pollution laws, mandating air quality controls, restricting vehicle access, and creating an air advisory system.
To be eligible for an STA, cities must have made significant progress in the past year in addressing sustainable transit. Awards are presented for projects implemented in the previous year rather than for planned activities or simply beginning construction.


=== Nominations ===
Cities must be nominated to be considered for the award. Nominations can come from government agencies, including the Mayor's office, NGOs, consultants, academics, or anyone else with a close working knowledge of the city's projects. Applicants are asked to provide program details, impact, significance, outcomes, transferability, and images.


=== Steering Committee ===
Final selection of the award recipient and honorable mentions is conducted by a steering committee, composed of experts and organizations working internationally on sustainable transportation. The committee includes the Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDP), World Resources Institute, World Bank, GIZ, Asian Development Bank, Clean Air Asia, ICLEI, and Despacio. The committee looks for projects completed in the previous year that demonstrate innovation and success in improving sustainable transportation.


== Past winners ==
2005:  Bogotá, Colombia
2006:  Seoul, South Korea
2007:  Guayaquil, Ecuador
2008:  Paris, France and  London, United Kingdom
2009:  New York City, United States
2010:  Ahmedabad, India
2011:  Guangzhou, China
2012:  Medellín, Colombia and  San Francisco, United States
2013:  Mexico City, Mexico
2014:  Buenos Aires, Argentina
2015:  Belo Horizonte, Rio de Janeiro, and São Paulo, Brazil
2016:  Yichang, China
2017:  Santiago, Chile
2018:  Dar es Salaam, Tanzania
2019:  Fortaleza, Brazil
2020:  Pune, India
2021:  Jakarta, Indonesia
2022:  Bogotá, Colombia
2023:  Paris, France
2024:  Tianjin, China


== References ==