The World Council of Churches (WCC) is a worldwide Christian inter-church organization founded in 1948 to work for the cause of ecumenism. Its full members today include the Assyrian Church of the East, most jurisdictions of the Eastern Orthodox Church (including the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople), the Oriental Orthodox Churches, the Union of Utrecht, the Lutheran World Federation, the Anglican Communion, the Mennonite churches, the World Methodist Council, the Baptist World Alliance, the World Communion of Reformed Churches, several Pentecostal churches, the Moravian Church, and the Malankara Mar Thoma Syrian Church. Notably, the Catholic Church is not a full member, although it sends delegates who have observer status to meetings.
The WCC describes itself as "a worldwide fellowship of 352 global, regional and sub-regional, national and local churches seeking unity, a common witness and Christian service". It has no head office as such, but its administrative centre is at the Ecumenical Centre in Geneva, Switzerland. The organization's members include denominations which claim to collectively represent over 600 million people across the world in more than 110 countries.
Many regional affiliates of the World Council of Churches, such as the Middle East Council of Churches and National Council of Churches in Australia, work for the cause of Christian unity at the domestic level, with member denominations including the Oriental Orthodox Churches, Lutheran churches, Catholic Church, Eastern Orthodox churches, Methodist churches, Anglican Communion, Reformed churches, among others.


== History ==
The Ecumenical Movement met with initial successes in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including the Edinburgh Missionary Conference of 1910 (chaired by future WCC honorary president John R. Mott). In 1920, the former Patriarch of Constantinople, Germanus V, wrote a letter addressed 'To all the Churches of Christ, wherever they may be', urging closer co-operation among separated Christians, and suggesting a 'League of Churches', parallel to the newly founded League of Nations". Church leaders agreed in 1937 to establish a World Council of Churches, based on a merger of the Faith and Order Movement (under Charles Brent of the Episcopal Church of the United States) and Life and Work Movement (under Nathan Söderblom of the Lutheran Church of Sweden) organisations.
Its official establishment was deferred with the outbreak of World War II until 23 August 1948. Delegates of 147 churches assembled in Amsterdam to merge the Faith and Order Movement and Life and Work Movement. This was consolidated by a second meeting at Lund in 1950, for which the British Methodist Robert Newton Flew edited an influential volume of studies, The Nature of the Church. Subsequent mergers were with the International Missionary Council in 1961 and the World Council of Christian Education, with its roots in the 18th century Sunday School movement, in 1971.
WCC member churches include the Assyrian Church of the East and the Oriental Orthodox Churches, almost all of the Eastern Orthodox Churches and Lutheran Churches; the Moravian Church; the Anglican Communion; some Old Catholic Churches; the Methodist churches; the Baptists churches; the Presbyterian and other Reformed churches, a sampling of united and independent churches, and some Pentecostal churches.
Many churches who refused to join the WCC joined to form the World Evangelical Alliance.
Neither the WCC nor the U.S.-based National Council of Churches (NCC) include denominations such as Jehovah’s Witnesses, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), and other groups which have historically refused to affirm certain widely accepted creeds of Christendom (for example, the Holy Trinity as canonized by the Nicene Creed).

Delegates sent from the member churches meet every seven or eight years in an Assembly, which elects a Central Committee that governs between Assemblies. A variety of other committees and commissions answer to the Central Committee and its staff. Assemblies have been held since 1948.

The "human rights abuses in communist countries evoked grave concern among the leaders of the World Council of Churches." However, historian Christopher Andrew claims that, during the Cold War, a number of important WCC representatives of the Orthodox Church in Eastern Europe had been working for the KGB, and that they influenced the policy of the WCC. From 1955 to 1958, Robert S. Bilheimer co-chaired a WCC international commission to prepare a document addressing the threat of nuclear warfare during the Cold War.
At the 1961 conference, a 32-year-old Russian Orthodox Bishop named Aleksey Ridiger was sent as delegate to the assembly, and then appointed to the WCC's central committee. He was later elected as Russian patriarch in 1990 as Alexei II.
The ninth assembly took place in Porto Alegre, Brazil in February 2006, under the theme "God, in your grace, transform the world". During the first Assemblies, theologians Vasileios Ioannidis and Amilkas Alivizatos contributed significantly to the debates that led to the drafting of the "Toronto Statement", a foundational document which facilitated Eastern Orthodox participation in the organization and today it constitutes its ecclesiological charter.
The 10th Assembly was held in Busan, Republic of Korea, from 30 October to 8 November 2013.
In 2013 Dr. Agnes Abuom of Nairobi, from the Anglican Church of Kenya, was elected as moderator of the Central Committee of the World Council of Churches; she is the first woman and the first African to hold this position.
The 11th Assembly of the World Council of Churches took place in Karlsruhe, Germany, from 31 August to 8 September 2022, under the theme "Christ's love moves the world to reconciliation and unity".


== Member Churches ==


=== Members ===
African Brotherhood Church
African Christian Church & Schools
African Church of the Holy Spirit
Africa Inland Church of South Sudan and Sudan
African Israel Church Nineveh
African Methodist Episcopal Church
African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church
African Protestant Church
American Baptist Churches USA
Anglican Church in Aotearoa, New Zealand and Polynesia
Anglican Church in Japan
Anglican Church of Australia
Anglican Church of Burundi
Anglican Church of Canada
Anglican Church of Kenya
Anglican Church of Korea
Anglican Church of South America
Anglican Church of Southern Africa
Anglican Church of Tanzania
Armenian Apostolic Church (Holy See of Cilicia)
Armenian Apostolic Church (Mother See of Holy Etchmiadzin)
Association of Baptist Churches in Rwanda
Association of Evangelical Reformed Churches of Burkina Faso
Association of Mennonite Congregations in Germany
Association The Church of God
Bangladesh Baptist Church Sangha
Baptist Association of El Salvador
Baptist Convention of Haiti
Baptist Convention of Nicaragua
Baptist Union of Denmark
Baptist Union of Great Britain
Baptist Union of Hungary
Baptist Union of New Zealand
Batak Christian Community Church
Bengal Orissa Bihar Baptist Convention
Bolivian Evangelical Lutheran Church
Canadian Yearly Meeting of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers)
Catholic Diocese of the Old Catholics in Germany
China Christian Council
Christian Biblical Church
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) in Canada
Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) in the United States
Christian Church of Central Sulawesi
Christian Church of Sumba
Christian Churches New Zealand
Christian Evangelical Church in Minahasa
Christian Evangelical Church of Sangihe Talaud
Christian Methodist Episcopal Church
Christian Protestant Angkola Church
Christian Protestant Church in Indonesia
Church in the Province of the West Indies
Church in Wales
Church of Bangladesh
Church of Central Africa Presbyterian – Blantyre Synod
Church of Ceylon
Church of Christ - Harris Mission (Harrist Church)
Church of Christ in Congo - Anglican Community of Congo
Church of Christ in Congo - Baptist Community of Congo
Church of Christ in Congo - Community of Disciples of Christ in Congo
Church of Christ in Congo - Evangelical Community of Congo
Church of Christ in Congo - Mennonite Community in Congo
Church of Christ in Congo - Presbyterian Community of Congo
Church of Christ in Congo - Presbyterian Community of Kinshasa
Church of Christ in Congo - Protestant Baptist Church in Africa / Episcopal Baptist Community in Africa
Church of Christ in Thailand
Church of Christ Light of the Holy Spirit
Church of Cyprus
Church of England
Church of Greece
Church of Ireland
Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar
Church of Melanesia
Church of Nigeria
Church of North India
Church of Norway
Church of Pakistan
Church of Scotland
Church of South India
Church of Sweden
Church of the Brethren
Church of the Brethren in Nigeria
Church of the Province of Central Africa
Church of the Province of Myanmar
Church of the Province of the Indian Ocean
Church of the Province of West Africa
Church of Uganda
Churches of Christ in Australia
Community of Baptist Churches in Central Africa
Congregational Christian Church in American Samoa
Congregational Christian Church in Samoa
Congregational Christian Church of Niue
Congregational Christian Church of Tuvalu
Convention of Philippine Baptist Churches
Coptic Orthodox Church
Council of African Instituted Churches of Southern Africa
Council of Baptist Churches in North East India
Czechoslovak Hussite Church
Dutch Reformed Church
East Java Christian Church
Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople
Episcopal Anglican Church of Brazil
Episcopal Church in Jerusalem and the Middle East
Episcopal Church in the Philippines
Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Estonian Evangelical Lutheran Church
Ethiopian Evangelical Church Mekane Yesus
Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church
Evangelical Baptist Church in Angola
Evangelical Baptist Union of Italy
Evangelical Christian Church in Halmahera
Evangelical Christian Church in Tanah Papua
Evangelical Church in Central Germany
Evangelical Church in New Caledonia and the Loyalty Islands
Evangelical Church of Cameroon
Evangelical Church of Congo
Evangelical Church of Czech Brethren
Evangelical Church of Gabon
Evangelical Church of Greece
Protestant Church of the Augsburg and Helvetic Confessions in Austria
Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in Poland
Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in Romania
Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in Slovakia
Evangelical Church of the Disciples of Christ in Argentina
Evangelical Church of the Lutheran Confession in Brazil
Evangelical Church of the River Plate
Evangelical Congregational Church in Angola
Evangelical Lutheran Church in America
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Bavaria
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Brunswick
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Chile
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Congo
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Denmark
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Hungary
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Jordan and the Holy Land
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Namibia
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Northern Germany
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Southern Africa
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Tanzania
Evangelical Lutheran Church in the Republic of Namibia
Evangelical Lutheran Church in Zimbabwe
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Ghana
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Hanover
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Iceland
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Latvia
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Papua New Guinea
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Romania
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Saxony
Evangelical Lutheran Church of Schaumburg-Lippe
Evangelical Methodist Church in Bolivia
Evangelical Methodist Church in Italy
Evangelical Methodist Church in the Philippines
Evangelical Methodist Church of Argentina
Evangelical Pentecostal Mission of Angola
Evangelical Presbyterian Church, Ghana
Evangelical Presbyterian Church in South Africa
Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Egypt Synod of the Nile
Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Iran
Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Portugal
Evangelical Presbyterian Church of Togo
Evangelical Reformed Church of Angola
Free Pentecostal Missions Church of Chile
Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga (Methodist Church in Tonga)
Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria and All Africa
Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Antioch and All the East
Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Jerusalem
Holy Apostolic Catholic Assyrian Church of the East
Hong Kong Council of the Church of Christ in China
Hungarian Reformed Church in America
Independent Presbyterian Church of Brazil
Indonesian Christian Church (GKI)
Indonesian Christian Church (HKI)
International Council of Community Churches
International Evangelical Church
Jamaica Baptist Union
Javanese Christian Churches
Kalimantan Evangelical Church
Karo Batak Protestant Church
Kenya Evangelical Lutheran Church
Kiribati Uniting Church
Korean Christian Church in Japan
Korean Methodist Church
Lao Evangelical Church
Latvian Evangelical Lutheran Church Abroad
Lesotho Evangelical Church
Lusitanian Church of Portugal
Lutheran Church in Liberia
Malagasy Lutheran Church
Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church
Maohi Protestant Church
Mar Thoma Syrian Church of Malabar
Mara Evangelical Church
Mennonite Church in the Netherlands
Methodist Church
Methodist Church Ghana
Methodist Church in Brazil
Methodist Church in Cuba
Methodist Church in Fiji and Rotuma
Methodist Church in India
Methodist Church in Indonesia
Methodist Church in Ireland
Methodist Church in Kenya
Methodist Church in Malaysia
Methodist Church in Singapore
Methodist Church in the Caribbean and the Americas
Methodist Church in Zimbabwe
Methodist Church Nigeria
Methodist Church of Chile
Methodist Church of Mexico
Methodist Church of New Zealand
Methodist Church of Peru
Methodist Church of Puerto Rico
Methodist Church of Samoa
Methodist Church of Southern Africa
Methodist Church of Togo
Methodist Church of Uruguay
Methodist Church Sierra Leone
Methodist Church, Sri Lanka
Methodist Church, Upper Myanmar
Moravian Church, Eastern West Indies Province
Moravian Church in America
Moravian Church in Jamaica
Moravian Church in Nicaragua
Moravian Church in South Africa
Moravian Church in Suriname
Moravian Church in Tanzania
Moravian Church in Western Europe
Myanmar Baptist Convention
National Baptist Convention of America, Inc.
National Baptist Convention USA, Inc.
National Evangelical Synod of Syria and Lebanon
Native Baptist Church of Cameroon
Nias Christian Protestant Church
Nigerian Baptist Convention
Old Catholic Church in Austria
Old Catholic Church in the Netherlands
Old-Catholic Church of Switzerland
Old-Catholic Mariavite Church in Poland
Orthodox Autocephalous Church of Albania
Orthodox Church in America
Orthodox Church in Japan
Orthodox Church in the Czech Lands and Slovakia
Orthodox Church of Finland
Pasundan Christian Church
Pentecostal Church of Chile
Pentecostal Mission Church
Philippine Independent Church
Polish Autocephalous Orthodox Church
Polish Catholic Church in Poland
Polish National Catholic Church
Presbyterian Church in Cameroon
Presbyterian Church in Canada
Presbyterian Church in Rwanda
Presbyterian Church in Taiwan
Presbyterian Church in the Republic of Korea
Presbyterian Church of Africa
Presbyterian Church of Aotearoa New Zealand
Presbyterian Church of Cameroon
Presbyterian Church in Colombia
Presbyterian Church of East Africa
Presbyterian Church of Ghana
Presbyterian Church of Korea
Presbyterian Church of Liberia
Presbyterian Church of Mozambique
Presbyterian Church of Nigeria
Presbyterian Church of Pakistan
Presbyterian Church of South Sudan
Presbyterian Church of Trinidad and Tobago
Presbyterian Church of Vanuatu
Presbyterian Church of Wales
Presbyterian Church (USA)
Presbyterian-Reformed Church in Cuba
Progressive National Baptist Convention
Protestant Christian Batak Church
Protestant Christian Church in Bali
Protestant Church in Germany
Protestant Church in Indonesia
Protestant Church in Sabah
Protestant Church in South-East Sulawesi
Protestant Church in Switzerland
Protestant Church in the Moluccas
Protestant Church in the Netherlands
Protestant Church in Timor Lorosa'e
Protestant Church in Western Indonesia
Protestant Church of Algeria
Protestant Evangelical Church in Timor
Protestant Methodist Church of Benin
Province of the Anglican Church in Rwanda
Province of the Episcopal Church of South Sudan
Province of the Episcopal Church of Sudan
Reformed Christian Church in Serbia & Montenegro
Reformed Christian Church in Slovakia
Reformed Church in America
Reformed Church in Hungary
Reformed Church in Romania
Reformed Church in Zambia
Reformed Church in Zimbabwe
Reformed Church of Christ for Nations
Reformed Presbyterian Church of Equatorial Guinea
Religious Society of Friends: Friends General Conference
Religious Society of Friends: Friends United Meeting
Remonstrant Brotherhood
Romanian Orthodox Church
Russian Orthodox Church
Salvadorean Lutheran Synod
Samavesam of Telugu Baptist Churches
Scottish Episcopal Church
Serbian Orthodox Church
Silesian Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession
Simalungun Protestant Christian Church
Slovak Evangelical Church of the Augsburg Confession in Serbia & Montenegro
Spanish Evangelical Church
Spanish Reformed Episcopal Church
Syrian Orthodox Patriarchate of Antioch and All the East
The African Church
The Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa
The Church of the Lord (Prayer Fellowship) Worldwide
The Episcopal / Anglican Province of Alexandria
The Episcopal Church
The First African Church Mission
Toraja Church
Union of Baptist Churches in Cameroon
Union of Protestant Churches in Alsace and Lorraine
Union of the Armenian Evangelical Churches in the Near East
Union of Welsh Independents
United Church in Jamaica and the Cayman Islands
United Church in Papua New Guinea
United Church in the Solomon Islands
United Church of Canada
United Church of Christ
United Church of Christ - Congregational in the Marshall Islands
United Church of Christ in Japan
United Church of Christ in the Philippines
United Church of Christ in Zimbabwe
United Church of Zambia
United Congregational Church of Southern Africa
United Evangelical Lutheran Church
United Evangelical Lutheran Churches in India
United Free Church of Scotland
United Methodist Church
United Methodist Church of Ivory Coast
United Presbyterian Church of Brazil
United Protestant Church of Belgium
United Protestant Church of Curaçao
United Protestant Church of France
United Reformed Church
Uniting Church in Australia
Uniting Church in Sweden
Uniting Presbyterian Church in Southern Africa
Uniting Reformed Church in Southern Africa
Waldensian Church


== Events and presidents ==


=== Assemblies ===
The World Council of Churches has held 11 Assemblies to date, starting with the founding assembly in 1948:

Amsterdam, Netherlands, 22 August – 4 September 1948
Evanston, Illinois, United States, 15–31 August 1954
New Delhi, India, 19 November – 5 December 1961
Uppsala, Sweden, 4–20 July 1968
Nairobi, Kenya, 23 November – 10 December 1975
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 24 July – 10 August 1983
Canberra, ACT, Australia, 7–21 February 1991
Harare, Zimbabwe, 3–14 December 1998
Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, 14–23 February 2006
Busan, South Korea, 30 October – 8 November 2013
Karlsruhe, Germany, 31 August – 8 September 2022


=== Presidents ===
Presidents elected at the 11th Assembly are:

Africa: Rev. Dr. Rufus Okikiola Ositelu, (Church of the Lord (Aladura))
Asia: Rev. Dr Henriette Hutabarat-Lebang (Gereja Toraja)
Europe: Rev. Dr. Susan Durber (United Reformed Church)
Latin America and Caribbean: Rev. Philip Silvin Wright (Anglican Diocese of Belize, Church in the Province of the West Indies)
North America: Rev. Angelique Walker-Smith (National Baptist Convention USA)
Pacific: Rev. François Pihaatae (Maòhi Protestant Church)
Eastern Orthodox: H.E. Metropolitan Dr. Vasilios of Constantia – Ammochostos, Church of Cyprus
Oriental Orthodox: H.H. Catholicos Aram I (Armenian Apostolic Church of Cilicia)
Former presidents of the World Council of Churches include:

The Rev. Gloria Nohemy Ulloa Alvarado (Presbyterian Church in Colombia)
Chang Sang (Presbyterian Church in the Republic of Korea)
T. C. Chao, Chinese theologian
Ignatius Zakka I Iwas (Patriarch of Antioch and all of the East Syriac Orthodox Church)
John X of Antioch (Patriarch of the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch)
Karekin II (Catholicos of the Armenian Apostolic Church)
Rev. Dr. S.A.E. Nababan, Indonesian theologian
Rev. Martin Niemöller, the famous Protestant anti-Nazi theologian
Mele'ana Puloka (Free Wesleyan Church of Tonga)
Mary-Anne Plaatjies van Huffel (Uniting Reformed Church in Southern Africa)
Archbishop Anders Wejryd (Church of Sweden)


=== General secretaries ===
Since the World Council of Churches was officially founded in 1948, the following men have served as general secretary:


== Commissions and teams ==
There are two complementary approaches to ecumenism: dialogue and action. The Faith and Order Movement and Life and Work Movement represent these approaches. These approaches are reflected in the work of the WCC in its commissions, these being:

Echos – Commission on Youth (ages 18–30)
Commission of the Churches on Diakonia and Development
Commission on Education and Ecumenical Formation
Commission of the Churches on International Affairs
Commission on Justice, Peace and Creation
Commission on World Mission and Evangelism
Faith and Order Plenary Commission and the Faith and Order Standing Commission
Joint Consultative Group with Pentecostals
Joint Working Group WCC – Catholic Church (Vatican)
Reference Group on the Decade to Overcome Violence
Reference Group on Inter-Religious Relations
Special Commission on Orthodox Participation in the WCC


=== Diakonia and development and international relations commissions ===
The WCC acts through both its member churches and other religious and social organizations to coordinate ecumenical, evangelical, and social action.
Current WCC programs include a Decade to Overcome Violence, an international campaign to combat AIDS/HIV in Africa and the Justice, Peace and Integrity of Creation (JPIC) initiative.


=== Faith and Order Commission ===

WCC's Faith and Order Commission has been successful in working toward consensus on Baptism, Eucharist, and Ministry, on the date of Easter, on the nature and purpose of the church (ecclesiology), and on ecumenical hermeneutics.


==== Texts ====
Baptism, Eucharist and Ministry (Faith and Order Paper No. 111, the "Lima Text"; 1982)
The Churchː Towards a Common Vision (Faith and Order Paper no. 214; 2013) after The Nature and Mission of the Church – A Stage on the Way to a Common Statement (Faith and Order Paper no. 198; 2005) and The Nature and Purpose of the Church (Faith and Order Paper no. 181; 1998)
Towards a Common Date of Easter


=== Justice, Peace and Creation Commission ===
Justice, Peace and Integrity of Creation (JPIC) has drawn many elements together with an environmental focus. Its mandate is:

To analyze and reflect on justice, peace and creation in their interrelatedness, to promote values and practices that make for a culture of peace, and to work towards a culture of solidarity with young people, women, Indigenous Peoples and racially and ethnically oppressed people.
Focal issues have been globalization and the emergence of new social movements (in terms of people bonding together in the struggle for justice, peace, and the protection of creation).
Attention has been given to issues around:

economy
environment
Indigenous Peoples
peace
people with disabilities
racism
women
youth


=== Relations with the Roman Catholic Church ===

The largest Christian body, the Roman Catholic Church, is not a member of the WCC, but has worked closely with the council for more than three decades and sends observers to all major WCC conferences as well as to its Central Committee meetings and the Assemblies (cf. Joint Working Group).
The Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity also nominates 12 members to the WCC's Faith and Order Commission as full members. While not a member of the WCC, the Catholic Church is a member of some other ecumenical bodies at regional and national levels, for example, the National Council of Churches in Australia and the National Council of Christian Churches in Brazil (CONIC).
Pope Pius XI stated in 1928, that the only means by which the world Christian community was to return to faith, was to return to Roman Catholic worship. In this regard, the Papacy rejected, to a great extent, the idea of the participation of the Catholic Church within the World Council of Churches.
Pius XI stated that the ‘One True Church’ was that of the Roman Catholic denomination, and therefore there was the implication that the Catholic Church was not permitted at this stage to engage with other denominations, which the Papacy considered to be irrelevant. A similar policy was followed by his successor, Pope Pius XII; the Catholic Church, therefore, did not attend the 1948 meeting of the WCC, in addition to the idea that all members of the Church were barred from attending WCC conferences.
Pope John XXIII took a different stance however, and in 1958 he was elected as the head of the Catholic Church. Ecumenism was a new element of Catholic ideology which had been permitted, which was signified to a great extent, when John XXIII met with the then Archbishop of Canterbury, Geoffrey Fisher. This was the first meeting between an Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Pope in the Vatican for 600 years. John XXIII later developed the office of the Secretariat for Promoting Christian Unity; which symbolised a dramatic shift in support for the ecumenical movement, from the Catholic Church, led from the Vatican. 1961 saw Catholic members attend the Delhi conference of the WCC, which marked a significant shift in attitude toward the WCC from the Papacy. There was the idea in addition to this, that the Pope invited non-Catholics to attend the Vatican II Council. This new approach to inter-denominational relations was marked within the Unitatis Redintegratio decree.
This document marked several key reforms within the Catholic approach:
I.	‘Separated brethren’ was the new term for non-Catholics, as opposed to the previously used ‘heretics’ 
II.	Both Catholic and non-Catholic elements are held responsible for the schism between Catholicism and the Protestant movement 
III.	Non-Catholics are recognised to the contributions that they make to Christian belief overall 
Further reforms have been enacted with regard to the nature of the Catholic Church on the world stage, for instance the 1965 union with the Patriarch of Constantinople, whereby the 1054 schism was undermined. In addition to this, Michael Ramsay, the then Archbishop of Canterbury, received an episcopal ring in 1966; a mark of union which had not been seen since prior to the Reformation. Moreover, the Anglican, Roman Catholic International Committee was additionally established as a means of promoting communication and cohesion between the two denominations. This has since marked a new level of participation of the Catholic Faith in the aforementioned ecumenical movement, and therefore is the basis for increased participation from the faith, in the WCC.


=== Special Commission on Orthodox Participation in the WCC ===
A Special Commission was set up by the eighth Harare Assembly in December 1998 to address Orthodox concerns about WCC membership and the council's decision-making style, public statements, worship practices, and other issues. It issued its final report in 2006. Specific issues that it clarified were that the WCC does not formulate doctrine, does not have authority to rule on moral issues, nor does it have any ecclesiastical authority. Such authority is entirely internal to each individual member church. It proposed that the WCC adopt a consensus method of decision making. It proposed that Orthodox members be brought in parity with non-Orthodox members. It further proposed clarification that inter-confessional prayer at WCC events is not worship, particularly "it should avoid giving the impression of being the worship of a church", and confessional and inter-confessional prayer each be specifically identified as such at WCC events.


== Peace journalism ==
The WCC is also a prominent supporter and practitioning body for Peace journalism: journalism practice that aims to avoid a value bias in favor of violence that often characterizes coverage of conflict.


== Spin-offs and related organizations ==
The ACT Alliance, bringing together over 100 church-backed relief and development organizations worldwide, was born out of the merger of ACT International (Action by Churches Together International) and ACT Development (Action by Churches Together for Development) in March 2010. Both ACT International, established in 1995, and ACT Development (2007) were created through the leadership of the World Council of Churches (WCC). The two bodies coordinated the work of agencies related to the member churches of the WCC and the Lutheran World Federation in the areas of humanitarian emergencies and poverty reduction respectively.
The Ecumenical Advocacy Alliance was officially founded in December 2000 at a meeting convened by the WCC. There are currently 73 churches and Christian organizations that are members of the Alliance, from Catholic, Evangelical, Orthodox and Protestant traditions. These members, representing a combined constituency of tens of millions of people around the world, are committed to working together in public witness and action for justice on defined issues of common concern. Current campaigns are on Food and on HIV and AIDS.
The Ecumenical Church Loan Fund (ECLOF) was founded in 1946 as one of the world's first international micro-credit institutions in the service of the poor. Willem Visser 't Hooft, then general secretary of the "WCC in process of formation" played an important role in founding ECLOF. It was he who sketched the prospects and challenges for the proposed institution and gave specific ideas on potential sources of funds. His inspiration and teamwork marked the beginning of a long and fruitful cooperation between ECLOF and the WCC.
The Ecumenical Development Cooperative Society U.A (now known as Oikocredit) was developed from discussions at the 1968 Uppsala 4th Assembly, regarding church divestment from financial institutions supporting apartheid-era South Africa and the war in Vietnam. After several years of planning, the cooperative society was founded in 1975 in the Netherlands to provide an alternative ethical investment vehicle to church institutions, by providing credit to productive enterprises serving economically disadvantaged populations. Originally organized for large institutional members of the WCC, by 1976 local congregations developed Support Associations to enable congregations as well as individuals to participate. EDCS became independent from the WCC in 1977.
Ecumenical News International (ENI) was launched in 1994 as a global news service reporting on ecumenical developments and other news of the Christian churches, and giving religious perspectives on news developments worldwide. The joint sponsors of ENI, which was based at the Ecumenical Centre in Geneva, Switzerland, were the World Council of Churches, the Lutheran World Federation, the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, and the Conference of European Churches, which also had their headquarters at the Ecumenical Centre. A shortage of funds led to the suspension of the work of ENI in 2012. As of 2024 ENI remains closed.


== Regional/national councils ==
The WCC has not sought the organic union of different Christian denominations, but it has, however, facilitated dialogue and supported local, national, and regional dialogue and cooperation.
Membership in a regional or national council does not mean that the particular group is also a member of the WCC.

Africa
All Africa Conference of Churches
Organization of African Instituted Churches
Asia (including Australia and New Zealand)
Christian Conference of Asia (CCA), Hong Kong
National Council of Churches in Australia
National Council of Churches in the Philippines
Caribbean
Caribbean Conference of Churches
Europe
Conference of European Churches, Geneva, Switzerland
Council of Christian Churches of an African Approach in Europe
Latin America
Latin American Council of Churches
Middle East
Middle East Council of Churches
North America
Canadian Council of Churches
National Council of the Churches of Christ in the USA
Pacific
Pacific Conference of Churches, Suva, Fiji


== Criticism ==


=== Alleged neglect of suffering church in Eastern Europe ===

Some historians, the U.S. State Department and former KGB officers themselves have alleged and provided corroborating evidence that the KGB's influence directly, or through lobbying by means of a front organization, the Christian Peace Conference, resulted in the WCC's failure to recognize or act on calls for help from persecuted East European Christians at the 1983 Vancouver General Assembly.


=== Claims of infiltration and influence by the KGB ===
It is claimed the KGB has infiltrated and influenced past WCC councils and policy. In 1992, Father Gleb Yakunin, a vice Chairman of a Russian parliamentary commission that investigated the activities of the KGB, citing verbatim KGB reports, claimed that its Fifth Directorate was actively involved in influencing WCC policy from 1967 to 1989. For example, in the 1983 WCC General Assembly in Vancouver, one cited document described the presence and activities of 47 KGB agents to secure the election of an "acceptable" candidate as General Secretary. The Mitrokhin Archive reveals more about the depth of the penetration and influence wielded by the KGB over the WCC. Metropolitan Nikodim was a KGB agent, codenamed SVYATOSLAV, who served as one of six WCC Presidents from 1975 until his death. His earlier intervention had resulted in the WCC making no comment on the invasion of Czechoslovakia. As a result of his influence and that of other agents, it is claimed the USSR was rarely publicly criticised. In 1989, copies of the KGB documents claim "the WCC executive and central committee adopted public statements (eight) and messages (three)" which corresponded to its own political direction. Appeals from suffering dissidents both from within the Russian Orthodox Church and Protestants were ignored in 1983.  Metropolitan Aleksi Ridiger of Tallinn and Estonia was repeatedly alleged to be a KGB agent codenamed DROZDOV, who in 1988 was awarded an honorary citation for services to the KGB by its chairman. Despite official disavowals, The Guardian described the evidence as "compelling".  In 1990 he became Alexius II, the 15th Patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church. Upon his death in 2008, the WCC's official tribute, by its Council officers, described him as "courageous", "supportive and constructive" and the recipient of "abundant blessing", no reference was made to the allegations.


=== Attitude towards Israel ===
The World Council of Churches has been described as taking an adversarial position toward the state of Israel. It has also been claimed the council has focused particularly on activities and publications criticizing Israel in comparison with other human rights issues. It is similarly claimed that it downplayed appeals from Egyptian Copts about human rights abuses under Sadat and Mubarak, in order to focus on its neighbour. In 2009, the Council called for an international boycott on goods produced in Israeli settlements, which it described as 'illegal, unjust' and 'incompatible with peace'. In 2013, the General Secretary was reported to claim in Cairo, "We support the Palestinians. The WCC supports the Palestinians, because they are in the right." The WCC's Ecumenical Accompaniment Programme in Palestine and Israel (EAPPI) has been criticised by the Board of Deputies of British Jews for promoting "an inflammatory and partisan programme at the expense of its interfaith relations". The WCC secretariat was involved in preparing and helped disseminate the  Kairos Palestine Document, which declares "the Israeli occupation of Palestinian land is a sin against God and humanity because it deprives the Palestinians of their basic human rights", and in the view of one critic, its "authors want to see a single state".
On the other hand, the WCC claims "Antisemitism is sin against God and man".


=== Opposition to Christian Zionism ===
Christian Zionism, which has long represented a major thread of historic and contemporary Protestants, is characterised as a view which "distort(s) the interpretation of the Word of God" and "damage(s) intra-Christian relations".

In this context, what is a source of concern is that Islamic fundamentalisms are giving rise to a counter reaction of other religious fundamentalisms, the most dangerous of which is Jewish fundamentalism which exploits the Islamic fundamentalist phenomenon to justify before western societies the distasteful aberrations of Zionism in Palestine.
Frank Chikane, moderator of the Commission of the Churches on International Affairs (CCIA) of the World Council of Churches (WCC), was criticised for using the term 'demons' to describe advocacy for Zionism in 2021.
On January 4, 2023, World Council of Churches general secretary Jerry Pillay joined the Episcopal Diocese of Jerusalem and all the churches of the Holy Land in condemning the desecration of the historic Protestant cemetery on Mount Zion.


== See also ==

Lima Liturgy
Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen
John R. Mott
John Romanides
Joseph Oldham
Jeanne Audrey Powers
Nathan Soderblom
Charles Henry Brent
Christian ecumenism
Ecumenical Association of Third World Theologians
World Summit of Religious Leaders
Programme to Combat Racism
Authorship of the Bible
List of the largest Protestant bodies
Jennifer Marianne Hart
Buku Ende
Buku Nyanyian HKBP


== References ==


=== Citations ===


=== Sources ===


== Further reading ==
W. A. Visser 't Hooft, The Genesis of the World Council of Churches, in: A History of The Ecumenical Movement 1517–1948, R. Rose, S. Ch. Neill (ed.), London: SPCK 1967, second edition with revised bibliography, pp. 697–724.


== External links ==
Official website