Xenophilia or xenophily is the love for, attraction to, or appreciation of foreign people, manners, customs, or cultures. It is the antonym of xenophobia or xenophoby. The word is a modern coinage from the Greek "xenos" (ξένος) (stranger, unknown, foreign) and "philia" (φιλία) (love, attraction), though the word itself is not found in classical Greek.


== In biology ==
In biology xenophily includes, for example, the acceptance by an insect of an introduced foreign plant closely related to the normal host. Xenophily is distinguished from xenophagy (or allotrophy), and is less common than xenophoby. Early 20th-century entomologists incorrectly concluded that the evolution of the glandular terminal disk was a function of xenophily, following its discovery in myrmecophilous larvae.


== In culture and politics ==
Cultural appreciation refers to attraction or admiration towards one or more cultures which are not one's own. Individual examples are usually suffixed with -philia, from the Ancient Greek word philia (φιλία), "love, affection". Cultural xenophilia according to some sources can be connected with cultural cringe. It may also be area-specific, such as led the Romans to believe that Greeks were better than Romans at music, art and philosophy, though evidently not better in military matters.


=== National or ethnic xenophilias ===
Anglophile: a non-English person who is extremely fond of all things English. Antonym: Anglophobe
Australophile: a fan of Australian culture
Austrophile: a fan of Austrian culture
Canadaphile: a fan of Canadian culture. Antonym: Canadaphobe
Europhile: a person who wants to increase cooperation between governments within the European Union.
Fennophile: a fan of Finnish culture
Francophile or Gallophile: a fan of French culture. Antonym: Francophobe
Germanophile or Teutophile: a fan of German culture. Antonyms: Germanophobe and teutophobia
Hellenophile: a fan of Greek culture (i.e. someone prone to philhellenism)
Hibernophile: a lover of Ireland or Irish culture
Indophile: a fan of India
Italophile: a fan of Italy. Antonym: Italophobia
Japanophile: a non-Japanese person with a strong interest in Japan or Japanese culture. Antonym: Japanophobe
Judeophile: a lover of Jews or Jewish culture. Antonyms: Judeophobe and antisemite
Kartvelophile: an interest for Georgian culture
Negrophilia: a term used in the 1920s and 30s for the interest in Europe for African and African-American culture
Persophilia: a fan of Iranian culture
Russophilia: love of Russia and Russians. Antonym: Russophobe
Galician Russophilia was a pro-Russian movement in Galicia and Lodomeria in the late 19th Century
Sinophile: a non-Chinese person with a strong interest in China or Chinese culture. Antonym: Sinophobe
Slavophile: a fan of Slavic culture
Suecophile: someone with a great interest in the Swedish language and culture
Turkophile: a fan of Turkey and Turkish culture


=== Allophilia ===

Positive attitudes towards outgroups can be measured with the allophilia scale.


== In religion ==
Rabbi Jonathan Sacks, the English Orthodox Chief Rabbi, philosopher, theologian, and author, posited that xenophilia is deeply ingrained and central to Judaism.


== See also ==


== References ==