Algospeak: How Social Media Is Transforming the Future of Language is a 2025 non-fiction book by linguist and content creator Adam Aleksic, known online as Etymology Nerd. It explores various linguistic phenomena on the internet, including algospeak, internet slang, and linguistic innovations driven by social media algorithms.
Published by Knopf, the book released on July 15, 2025. Aleksic presented the book at Harvard Book Store on July 16.


== Contents ==
The book primarily argues that the internet and social media are driving many of recent linguistic innovations, and even crossing over to the offline world. To encapsulate this new way of social media-influenced expression, Aleksic proposes an expanded definition of algospeak, going beyond its original definition.
Aleksic discusses how social media algorithms—the system that determines which content will be shown to the user—drive content creators to optimize and self-censor their expression for greater reach. Creators often adopt niche labels like “goblincore” to more precisely reach their ideal audiences through algorithms, which in turn allows more precise targeted advertisement. Aleksic draws on his own experience as a creator, noting that his linguistic analysis of the Palestinian political phrase “From the river to the sea” had significantly less algorithmic reach than his other videos.
Furthermore, Aleksic documents how the wider public tends to adopt slang from minority groups on social media, criticizing it as a form of cultural appropriation. 


== Reception ==
Our Culture listed Algospeak on its list of most anticipated books set to release in the summer of 2025. Kirkus Reviews commented that the book is "an insightful and entertaining examination of social media's impact on how we speak." Reason praised the book for its exploration of how differing ideological subcultures—from incels to LGBT activists—develop strategies to avoid censorship.
New Scientist opined that while the book will quickly be outdated, "The underlying insights on how technology shapes language, however, will stay relevant." Aleksic's writing was described as "personable and knowledgeable" in a review for the Associated Press, which also endorsed the book's balance between academic rhetoric and an accessible style. The Los Angeles Review of Books described Algospeak as "a fascinating work of etymological analysis."


== See also ==
Because Internet


== References ==