Cheryl Gates McFadden (born March 2, 1949) is an American actress and choreographer. She is usually credited as Cheryl McFadden when working as a choreographer and Gates McFadden when working as an actress. She played Dr. Beverly Crusher in the television series Star Trek: The Next Generation, its four subsequent films, the sequel series Star Trek: Picard, and Star Trek: Prodigy.


== Early life ==

McFadden was born in Akron, Ohio, and grew up in the nearby suburb of Silver Lake. She graduated high school from Old Trail School in 1966. She attended Brandeis University, graduating with a Bachelor of Arts (cum laude) in the theatre arts, before moving to Paris, where she studied theatre with actor Jacques Lecoq at his school of physical theatre. McFadden is of Lithuanian descent on her mother's side.


== Career ==


=== Early work ===
In the 1970s, McFadden spent time teaching in post-secondary theater and dance departments, including those of the University of Pittsburgh, Harvard University, and George Washington University. During this period she formed a theatrical company, The New York Theatre Commotion, and in 1975 toured an all-female clown act, "Commedia Dell Pinky".
McFadden worked at The Jim Henson Company as the director of choreography and puppet movement for Labyrinth, The Muppets Take Manhattan, and uncredited work on Dreamchild. As a way of distinguishing her acting work from her choreography, she is usually credited as "Gates McFadden" as an actress and "Cheryl McFadden" as a choreographer. However, she was credited as "Cheryl McFadden" in the Troma movie When Nature Calls (1985) and in the season-three episode of The Cosby Show, "Cliff's 50th Birthday".


=== Star Trek: The Next Generation ===


==== Season 1 ====
In 1987, McFadden was cast as Dr. Beverly Crusher on Star Trek: The Next Generation. The Crusher character was slated to be Captain Jean-Luc Picard's love interest; another important aspect of the character was being a widow balancing motherhood and a career. McFadden clashed with Maurice Hurley, head writer and showrunner, about the characterization of Dr. Crusher; she later stated, "I definitely pissed off Hurley. Because I kept saying 'Why is it that I've raised this genius kid...and yet every time there's anything serious it's only the male characters who talk to him?'" She was also highly critical of the episode "Angel One", labeling it sexist. At Hurley's demand, McFadden's contract was not renewed at the end of the season. In her place, Diana Muldaur joined the production as the Enterprise's new chief medical officer, Dr. Katherine Pulaski, for the second season.


==== Seasons 3–7 ====

Series creator Gene Roddenberry admitted that the Dr. Pulaski character did not develop a chemistry with the other characters, so McFadden was approached to return as Dr. Crusher for the third season. She was hesitant, but after a phone call from co-star Patrick Stewart, and numerous fan letters, McFadden was persuaded to return to the role, which she then played through the remainder of the series.
Highlights for her character included "The High Ground", where she is kidnapped by terrorists; "Remember Me", where she becomes trapped in a warp bubble created by her son, Wesley, plunging her into an alternate reality where everyone begins to vanish; "The Host", which features a romance between the doctor and an alien composed of two symbiotic organisms; "Suspicions", in which she risks her career to solve the murder of a scientist; "Descent" where Crusher takes command of the Enterprise; "Sub Rosa", where she becomes the victim of a seductive "ghost"; and "Attached", where Picard and Crusher become telepathically linked as prisoners and learn their true feelings for one another.
McFadden reprised her role for all four TNG movies and also provided her voice for PC games Star Trek: A Final Unity and Star Trek Generations. McFadden directed the seventh season episode "Genesis" (her only directing credit) in which an infection causes the crew to de-evolve into primitive forms of life, and choreographed the dance routine in the fourth season's "Data's Day".


=== After The Next Generation ===

McFadden co-starred in the 1990 comedy Taking Care of Business with James Belushi, and fellow Next Generation alumnus John de Lancie (Q). That same year she appeared in The Hunt for Red October as Jack Ryan's wife, Catherine. In 1992, she appeared alongside fellow cast members Patrick Stewart, Jonathan Frakes, Brent Spiner, and Colm Meaney in a production of Every Good Boy Deserves Favour, which was performed in four cities. She also starred in the 1995 television series Marker with Richard Grieco and appeared in the made-for-television movie Crowned and Dangerous with Yasmine Bleeth in 1997. Additional television work was the role of Allison Rourke, Paul Buchman's boss, in four episodes of the sitcom Mad About You. In the spring of 2006, McFadden appeared in a series of television commercials for Microsoft.

She has taught at several universities (American Academy of Dramatic Arts, Brandeis, Harvard, Purdue, Temple, the Stella Academy in Hamburg, and the University of Pittsburgh). As of August 2010, she was listed as an adjunct faculty member in the School of Theater at the University of Southern California. She was the artistic director of the Ensemble Studio Theatre/Los Angeles from January 2009 to October 2014. During her tenure, she spearheaded the building of the Atwater Village Theatre Collective, a new two-theater space in Los Angeles.
McFadden has lent her voice as narrator in several audio books. In 2010, she was the narrator of "Confessor" (METAtropolis: Cascadia).
McFadden was initially nervous to attend fan conventions, due to a stalking issue early in her teaching career prior to her Star Trek tenure. However her concerns have not come to pass and she has since found conventions to be a positive experience.
McFadden narrated the multi-part documentary series The Center Seat: 55 Years of Star Trek, which aired on the cable channel History in 2021.  She was also one of the executive producers.
In 2021 McFadden launched Gates McFadden InvestiGates: Who Do You Think You Are?, a podcast for Brian Volk-Weiss's Nacelle Company, interviewing close friends and former co-stars.
She has since reprised the role of Crusher on Star Trek: Prodigy and Star Trek: Picard's third season as well as in the video game Star Trek Online.


== Personal life ==
McFadden became a mother in 1991. Her pregnancy was not written into the fourth season of TNG; instead, her character wore a laboratory coat over her uniform to conceal it. Next Generation co-star Brent Spiner is her son's godfather.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


=== Web series ===


== Theatre ==
Stage appearances

(As Cheryl McFadden) Ellen/Mrs. Saunders and Betty, Cloud 9, Theatre De Lys, New York City, 1981.
(As Cheryl McFadden) Title role, To Gillian on Her 37th Birthday, Ensemble Studio Theatre, New York City, 1983, then Circle in the Square Downtown, New York City, 1984.
(As Cheryl McFadden) Ruth, The Homecoming, Jewish Repertory Theatre, New York City, 1984.
(As Cheryl McFadden) Annie Sutter, The Bloodletters, Ensemble Studio Theatre, 1984.
(As Cheryl McFadden) Casey Staiger, How to Say Goodbye, Vineyard Theatre, New York City, 1986.
(As Cheryl McFadden) Dr. Handleman, Couch Tandem, Women's Interart Center, New York City, 1987.
Kate, Emerald City, Perry Street Theatre, New York City, 1988.
Lil, Voices in the Dark, George Street Playhouse, New Brunswick, NJ, 1998.
(As Cheryl McFadden) Mary, Rosario and the Gypsies, Ensemble Studio Theatre; and as Mrs. Malloy, The Matchmaker, La Jolla Playhouse, San Diego, CA.
Viva Detroit, Los Angeles
Every Good Boy Deserves Favour
L'Histoire du soldat
Stage work

(As Cheryl McFadden) Choreographer, The Winter's Tale, Brooklyn Academy of Music Theatre Company, Helen Owen Carey Playhouse, Brooklyn, NY, 1980.
(As Cheryl McFadden) Fight choreographer, Johnny on the Spot, Brooklyn Academy of Music Theatre Company, Brooklyn Academy of Music, Brooklyn, 1980.
(As Cheryl McFadden) Choreographer, A Midsummer Night's Dream, Brooklyn Academy of Music Theatre Company, Brooklyn Academy of Music, 1981.
Choreographer, Yesterday Is Over, Women's InterArt Center, New York City;
Director, Bottleneck at the Bar, Golden Lion Theatre, New York City;
Director and Choreographer, Bumps and Knots, Lyric Hammersmith Theatre, London;
Director and choreographer, Women of Trachis, He Who Gets Slapped, and Old Times, all Spingold Theater, Waltham, MA;
Director and choreographer, Medea, Studio Theatre, Pittsburgh, PA.


== Awards and honors ==
2024 – Saturn Awards – Lifetime Achievement Award – The Cast of Star Trek: The Next Generation


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Gates McFadden at IMDb
Gates McFadden at the Internet Off-Broadway Database (archived)
Gates McFadden at the TCM Movie Database 
Gates McFadden at Rotten Tomatoes
Gates McFadden at TV Guide
Gates McFadden Official Website