Golders Green Crematorium and Mausoleum was the first crematorium to be opened in London, and is one of the oldest crematoria in Britain. The land for the crematorium was purchased in 1900, costing £6,000 (equivalent to £820,000 in 2023) and the crematorium was opened in 1902 by Sir Henry Thompson, founder of the Cremation Society.
Golders Green Crematorium, as it is usually called, is in Hoop Lane, off Finchley Road, Golders Green, in northwest London, near Golders Green Underground station. It is directly opposite the Golders Green Jewish Cemetery. (Golders Green is an area with a large Jewish population.) The crematorium is secular, accepts all faiths and non-believers; clients may arrange their own type of service or remembrance event and choose whatever music they wish.
The crematorium gardens are listed at Grade I in the National Register of Historic Parks and Gardens.


== History ==

The lawfulness of cremation in Great Britain was not established until 1885. The Woking Crematorium had already been built in Woking and proved successful. At that time, cremation was championed by the Cremation Society of England. This society was governed by a council, at that time led by Sir Henry Thompson (president and founding member). There is a bust to his memory in the West Chapel of Golders Green Crematorium. Out of this Society was formed the London Cremation Company (which has its offices on the premises), who desired to build a crematorium within easy reach of London.
The crematorium in Golders Green was designed by the architect Sir Ernest George and his partner Alfred Yeates. The gardens were laid out by William Robinson. The crematorium is a red brick building in Lombardic style and was built in stages, as money became available. The crematorium opened in 1902 and was built in four phases (1901–1910, 1910–1911, 1912–1916, 1926–1928). By 1939, the site was largely completed, although since then some buildings have been added. Since November 1902 more than 323,500 cremations have taken place at Golders Green Crematorium, far more than any other British crematorium. It is estimated that the crematorium now averages around 2,000 cremations a year. The funerals of many prominent people have taken place there over the last century.

The chimney of the crematorium is located within the tower and the building is in an Italianate style. The 12 acres (4.9 ha) of gardens are extensively planted, and produce a beautiful and tranquil environment for visitors. There are several large tombs, two ponds and bridge, and a large crocus lawn. Another notable feature is a special children's section, which includes a swinging bench. There is also a 'communist corner' with memorials to notable members of the Communist Party of Great Britain. There are two cremation chapels and a Chapel of Memory. There are also three columbaria containing the ashes of thousands of Londoners and residents of neighbouring counties.
Fourteen holders of the Victoria Cross have been cremated here, and there are locations and memorials for many other military personnel of all ranks, and from many countries. Largest among them is the Commonwealth War Graves Commission memorial, commemorating 496 British and Commonwealth military casualties of both World Wars who were cremated here. Designed by Sir Edward Maufe, it was unveiled in 1952. Built in Portland stone with names listed on three bronze panels, it stands at head of an ornamental pond at the western end of the memorial cloister.
At Christmas, a Christmas tree is erected in the field in front of the main buildings. Although the crematorium is secular, a nativity scene is also placed near the Chapel of Memory.


== Notable monuments ==
The crematorium gardens are listed at Grade I in the National Register of Historic Parks and Gardens. The Philipson Family mausoleum, designed by Edwin Lutyens, is a Grade II* listed building on the National Heritage List for England and the crematorium building, the wall, along with memorials and gates, the Martin Smith Mausoleum and Into The Silent Land, a sculpture by Henry Alfred Pegram are all Grade II listed buildings. The largest sculpture portraying someone cremated here is the statue of Indian industrialist and friend of Gandhi, Ghanshyam Das Birla.


== Visiting ==
A map of the Garden of Rest and some information on persons cremated here is available from the office. Staff are available to help in finding a specific location.


== Notable cremations ==


=== Ashes at Golders Green Crematorium ===
Among those whose ashes are retained or were scattered here, are:


=== Ashes taken elsewhere ===
Among those cremated here, but whose ashes are elsewhere, are:


== Gallery ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==


== External links ==

Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC): Golders Green Crematorium
Golders Green Crematorium at Hampstead Garden Suburb Trust