GrapheneOS is an open-source, privacy and security focused Android operating system that runs on select Google Pixel devices, including smartphones, tablets and foldables.


== History ==

The main developer, Daniel Micay, originally worked on CopperheadOS, until a schism over software licensing between the co-founders of Copperhead Limited led to Micay's dismissal from the company in 2018. After the incident, Micay continued working on the Android Hardening project, which was renamed as GrapheneOS and announced in April 2019.
In March 2022, two GrapheneOS apps, "Secure Camera" and "Secure PDF Viewer", were released on the Google Play Store.
Also in March 2022, GrapheneOS released Android 12L for Google Pixel devices before Google did, second to ProtonAOSP.
In May 2023, Micay announced he would step down as lead developer of GrapheneOS and as a GrapheneOS Foundation director. As of  September 2024, the GrapheneOS Foundation's Federal Corporation Information lists Micay as one of its directors.


== Features ==


=== Sandboxed Google Play ===
By default Google apps are not installed with GrapheneOS, but users can install a sandboxed version of Google Play Services from the pre-installed "App Store". The sandboxed Google Play Services allows access to the Google Play Store and apps dependent on it, along with features including push notifications and in-app payments.
Around January 2024, Android Auto support was added to GrapheneOS, allowing users to install it via the App Store. The Sandboxed Google Play compatibility layer settings adds a new permission menu with 4 toggles for granting the minimal access required for wired Android Auto, wireless Android Auto, audio routing and phone calls.


=== Security and privacy features ===
GrapheneOS introduces revocable network access and sensors permission toggles for each installed app. GrapheneOS also introduces a PIN scrambling option for the lock screen as well as a feature called Duress password which will wipe on-device personal data when entered on lock screen instead of a regular PIN/password.
GrapheneOS randomizes Wi-Fi MAC addresses per connection (to a Wi-Fi network) by default, instead of the Android per-network default.
GrapheneOS includes automatic phone reboot when not in use, automatic WiFi and Bluetooth disabling, and system-level disabling of USB-C port, microphone, camera, and sensors for apps. Additionally, it offers the Contact and Storage Scopes feature, which allows users to select which specific contacts or files/folders an app can access.
A hardened Chromium-based web browser and WebView implementation known as Vanadium, is developed by GrapheneOS and included as the default web browser/WebView. It includes automatic updates, process and site-level sandboxing, and built-in ad and tracker blocking.
Auditor, a hardware-based attestation app, developed by GrapheneOS, which "provide strong hardware-based verification of the authenticity and integrity of the firmware/software on the device" is also included.
Apps like Secure Camera and Secure PDF Viewer offer features such as automatic removal of Exif metadata and protection against malicious code in PDF files.
GrapheneOS also includes a hardened memory allocator (hardened_malloc) intended to provide substantial defenses against common classes of vulnerabilities such as heap memory corruption. In addition, its Chromium-based browser/WebView (Vanadium) enables further exploit mitigations beyond upstream defaults (e.g., type-based Control-flow integrity (CFI), stronger Stack-smashing protection (SSP), zero-init of variables).


== Installation ==
GrapheneOS currently is only compatible with Google Pixel devices, due to specific requirements that GrapheneOS has for adding support for a new device, including an unlockable bootloader and proper implementation of verified boot. In October 2025, GrapheneOS revealed that it was working with a "major" Android OEM on future devices that would support the OS on Qualcomm Snapdragon platforms.
The operating system can be installed from various platforms, including Windows, macOS, Linux, and Android devices. Two installation methods are available: a WebUSB-based installer, recommended for most users, and a command-line based installer, intended for more experienced users.


== Reception ==
In 2019, Georg Pichler of Der Standard, and other news sources, quoted Edward Snowden saying on Twitter, "If I were configuring a smartphone today, I'd use Daniel Micay's GrapheneOS as the base operating system." 
In discussing why services should not force users to install proprietary apps, Lennart Mühlenmeier of netzpolitik.org suggested GrapheneOS as an alternative to Apple or Google. 
Svět Mobilně and Webtekno repeated the suggestions that GrapheneOS is a good security- and privacy-oriented replacement for standard Android. 
In a detailed review of GrapheneOS for Golem.de, Moritz Tremmel and Sebastian Grüner said they were able to use GrapheneOS similarly to other Android systems, while enjoying more freedom from Google, without noticing differences from "additional memory protection, but that's the way it should be." They concluded GrapheneOS cannot change how "Android devices become garbage after three years at the latest", but "it can better secure the devices during their remaining life while protecting privacy."
In June 2021, reviews of GrapheneOS, KaiOS, AliOS, and Tizen OS, were published in Cellular News. The review of GrapheneOS called it "arguably the best mobile operating system in terms of privacy and security." However, they criticized GrapheneOS for its inconvenience to users, saying "GrapheneOS is completely de-Googled and will stay that way forever—at least according to the developers." They also noticed a "slight performance decrease" and said "it might take two full seconds for an app—even if it’s just the Settings app—to fully load."
Louis Rossmann, activist and repairman who often talks about privacy-related topics, in September 2022 published a video recommending GrapheneOS as an operating system for daily use, discussing the OS's implementation of sandboxed Google Play Services. 
In March 2022, writing for How-To Geek Joe Fedewa said that Google apps were not included due to concerns over privacy, and GrapheneOS also did not include a default app store. Instead, Fedewa suggested, F-Droid could be used. 
In 2022, Jonathan Lamont of MobileSyrup reviewed GrapheneOS installed on a Pixel 3, after one week of use. He called GrapheneOS install process "straightforward" and concluded that he liked GrapheneOS overall, but criticized the post-install as "often not a seamless experience like using an unmodified Pixel or an iPhone", attributing his experience to his "over-reliance on Google apps" and the absence of some "smart" features in GrapheneOS default keyboard and camera apps, in comparison to software from Google. 
In his initial impressions post a week prior, Lamont said that after an easy install there were issues with permissions for Google's Messages app, and difficulty importing contacts; Lamont then concluded, "Anyone looking for a straightforward experience may want to avoid GrapheneOS or other privacy-oriented Android experiences since the privacy gains often come at the expense of convenience and ease of use."  
In July 2022, Charlie Osborne of ZDNET suggested that individuals who suspect a Pegasus infection use a secondary device with GrapheneOS for secure communication.
In January 2023, a Swiss startup company, Apostrophy AG, announced AphyOS, which is a subscription fee-based Android operating system and services "built atop" GrapheneOS.


== See also ==

Comparison of mobile operating systems
List of custom Android distributions
List of security-focused operating systems


== References and notes ==


== External links ==
Official website 
Comparison of Android-based Operating Systems