h3h3Productions is a YouTube channel created and hosted by Israeli American Ethan Klein. His content consists of reaction videos and sketch comedy in which he satirizes internet culture. The H3 Podcast is his current podcast channel that has been running since 2017.


== History ==
h3h3Productions is a YouTube channel launched in 2011 by Ethan and Hila Klein, an American and Israeli husband and wife duo. The channel is best known for its "reaction" videos, which comprise clips of a source video interspersed with commentary and absurd comedy sketches. The channel's overall style has been described as a cross between the works of comedy duo Tim & Eric and the TV series Mystery Science Theater 3000.
The channel has gained a reputation for critiquing a range of online personalities, as well as trends in internet culture and several YouTube policies. The Kleins have been noted for criticizing YouTube channels that entice young viewers to participate in online gambling related to the video game Counter-Strike: Global Offensive, mainly by trading skins for real-world currency.


=== Allegations against The Wall Street Journal ===
h3h3Productions, alongside several other channels, supported YouTube personality PewDiePie amid a 2017 controversy over jokes about Nazis in one of his videos from January. On February 14, The Wall Street Journal ran a story about PewDiePie's previous references to Adolf Hitler, which brought nine other videos into the debate and elicited frequent discussions on whether media took them out of context. When YouTube subsequently released tools to allow advertisers to avoid offensive videos, Ethan claimed that the tools were overly broad and negatively affected unrelated content, including his own channel.
One of the authors of the Wall Street Journal piece, Jack Nicas, wrote another article on March 24 claiming YouTube did not go far enough to prevent advertising from displaying on videos that might contain racist content. Ethan accused the report of being written selectively to maximize outrage. The article showed a Coca-Cola advert playing on a video of the white supremacist country song "Alabama Nigger" by American musical group Trashy White Band. Upon seeing that the video was not contributing to the uploader's income, Ethan alleged that Nicas had used an altered screenshot. Hours later, he was informed that the video was indeed monetized, but on behalf of a copyright claim rather than at the choice or to the benefit of the uploader. He withdrew his accusation in response, and The Wall Street Journal released a statement that it stood by the authenticity of the screenshots.


=== Hosseinzadeh v. Klein ===
In April 2016, Matt Hosseinzadeh, an American YouTube personality who goes by "MattHossZone" and "Bold Guy", filed a civil action against the Kleins for copyright infringement in a video on the h3h3Productions channel. Hosseinzadeh claims that he initially contacted the Kleins "to politely ask them to remove [his] content from their video," but that they refused. His lawyer claimed that the video used more than 70% of his work "while contributing nothing substantive to it".
After a video on this was released by h3h3Productions the following month, fellow YouTuber Philip DeFranco started a fundraiser on GoFundMe to help raise money for the Kleins' legal fees, citing the need to protect fair use on YouTube. On May 26, 2016, the Kleins announced that the $130,000 raised would go into an escrow account called the "Fair Use Protection Account" (FUPA), overseen by law firm Morrison & Lee LLP and to be used to help people defend fair use.
The Kleins won the lawsuit, with U.S. District Judge Katherine B. Forrest ruling that their commentary video constituted "fair use as a matter of law" and describing it as "quintessential comment and criticism". The case is the first of its kind to receive a judgment; while not legally binding across the United States, it provided a persuasive argument to be cited in future cases relating to fair use on YouTube.


=== Legal disputes with Triller and Ryan Kavanaugh ===

In May 2021, the company Triller sued Ethan and Hila Klein, alleging the pair had pirated the Jake Paul vs. Ben Askren fight on the H3 Podcast. Despite attempts to settle, the Kleins faced additional legal actions as the feud intensified. Ryan Kavanaugh, co-founder of Triller, filed a separate defamation lawsuit, accusing Ethan of spreading false claims and maliciously targeting him through various platforms. The accusations included promoting damaging articles, creating a website comparing Kavanaugh to Harvey Weinstein, and allegedly paying Wikipedia editors to tarnish Kavanaugh’s online reputation.
The lawsuits became a focal point of discussion on the H3 Podcast, where Ethan Klein publicly criticized Kavanaugh’s motives, framing the legal battle as an attempt to suppress free speech. As of August 2024, the parties have reached a settlement, but the terms have not been publicly disclosed.


=== Reaction content lawsuit ===
On June 20, 2025, Ethan revealed his plans to sue Twitch streamers Denims, Frogan, and Kaceytron for copyright infringement. Ethan declared these streamers reacted to his video covering Hasan Piker and used "substantial portions" of the video with minimal commentary. Ethan stated that the video was made premeditatedly, stating that "they would watch the entire video, add little to no commentary, react to it instantly, giving them no time to form an opinion," and that he had registered the video beforehand with the Library of Congress.
On July 31, 2025, Klein's legal team filed a subpoena to unmask the Reddit and Discord moderators of the h3snark subreddit and Discord server. Lawyers on behalf of the moderators attempted to quash the subpoena, stating it could lead to physical harm against the moderators if it succeeded.


== Nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website