Nijisanji (にじさんじ; stylized in all caps as NIJISANJI) is a virtual YouTuber agency owned by Anycolor Inc. (formerly Ichikara Inc.). The agency was founded in 2018 with the purpose of promoting the use of Live2D models and live streaming as opposed to the 3D and clips format popularized by Kizuna AI.


== History ==


=== 2018 ===
On 11 January 2018, Ichikara Inc. announced that they were opening recruitment for virtual idols. The campaign centered around Ichikara's iPhone X face tracking app, also named Nijisanji. The app was designed to simplify the process of becoming a VTuber using Live2D software and the iPhone X's Animoji feature. The announcement stated that accepted talents, known as Virtual Livers, would be expected to stream live to various platforms using this app. The name Nijisanji was not used to refer to the talents themselves until the announcement of the second wave of recruitment on 15 March 2018.
On 17 July 2018, auditions were started for a Chinese branch in Shanghai and Taipei, and in cooperation with CAPSULE Inc., would recruit from each eight people for a total of sixteen Livers. The partnership with CAPSULE Inc. would end in March 2019, with Ichikara revoking its license. CAPSULE Inc. would spinoff what it maintained into VEgo. VEgo itself would go inactive by the end of March 2020.


=== 2019 ===
After the end of the original Chinese branch in cooperation with Bilibili, new Chinese auditions started in April 2019. From these, the jointly-operated "VirtuaReal Project" would emerge later in May.
In May, Ichikara also launched its "Nijisanji Network" service where it supported other content creators and affiliated companies through the use of Nijisanji management and support resources. They also announce the first and only participants of the program being Indie VTuber Fairys-chan and Tenkai Tsukasa. The service shut down on 31 December 2019 with all its participants continuing activities on their own.
In July, auditions began for an Indonesian branch of the agency, Nijisanji ID, which was launched in September. In November and December, auditions began for Indian and Korean branches respectively (Nijisanji IN and KR), each beginning activity in January 2020.


=== 2020 ===
In January 2020, Nijisanji officially opened the English version of its Twitter (now known as X) accounts, followed by an English YouTube account in June. As part of their attempt to appeal to the English-speaking audience, they also rebranded their Indian branch into a broader English branch (Nijisanji EN). However, in November, the three members of Nijisanji EN were returned to their original Nijisanji IN branch, while the audition for the only English-speaking talents was held in December. Nijisanji IN was eventually dissolved and all its members graduated on 30 April 2021.
In September 2020, Nijisanji created an "Aggressive Acts and Slander Countermeasure Team" to offer counselling to victims of harassment and take legal measures against perpetrators of harassment, specifically the online harassment plaguing the Japanese entertainment industry. This announcement came in the wake of Hololive VTuber Mano Aloe's retirement after only two weeks of activity due to online harassment.
In October 2020, Nijisanji privated the various Among Us streams of its member after receiving a complaint by Masuoka, a programmer who made the popular Japanese translation mod of the game. Through a tweet, Masuoka specify that the reason for his complaint was that Nijisanji was using Masuoka mod without properly crediting him. Nijisanji have since entered negotiation with him to properly credit and license his work.
On 1 December, Ichikara Inc. announced the official launch of Nijisanji's first-wave auditions for English-speaking countries. The audition period lasted until 15 December.


=== 2021 ===
Nijisanji EN debuted its first wave on 16 May 2021 dubbed "LazuLight". It consisted of three female Livers: Elira Pendora, Pomu Rainpuff, and Finana Ryugu. A simultaneous commentary livestream on their English channel, hosted by Nijisanji ID members Hana Macchia and Bonnivier Pranaja, was also held. It was followed by OBSYDIA in July and Ethyria in October.
On 17 May 2021, Ichikara officially renamed itself to Anycolor.
In June, Anycolor would announce a talent training initiative known as "Virtual Talent Academy". Its first auditions would be held on 18 June 2021, who would begin training starting from November. Upon completion, the graduate may be given the offer to debut in Nijisanji or freely move to other agencies to try to audition to them.
On 12 December 2021, the fourth wave of Nijisanji EN VTubers debuted, called "Luxiem". It was made up of five male Livers: Luca Kaneshiro, Shu Yamino, Ike Eveland, Mysta Rias, and Vox Akuma. A debut program was hosted by Elira Pendora and Oliver Evans. Luxiem marked the debut of the first English-speaking male talent wave from a big VTuber agency.


=== 2022 ===
On 17 February 2022, Anycolor announced the merger of Nijisanji ID and Nijisanji KR into the main Nijisanji branch starting on 15 April 2022. As part of the merger, the official social media accounts of the two branches would cease operation and the ongoing audition for their latest generation for both would be cancelled.
It was later announced that Nijisanji's VTubers would collaborate with Japanese singer Yuya Tegoshi.
On 8 June 2022, Anycolor publicly listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, opening at ¥4,810 per share. By 18 October 2022, the company was estimated to be worth over US$2.5 billion, with founder Riku Tazumi's 45% share netting him a personal wealth of roughly US$1.1 billion, making him Japan's youngest billionaire.
On 13 July 2022, Anycolor announced the next wave of Virtual Talent Academy graduates to debut directly into Nijisanji. The new wave, "Voltaction", began their activities on 16 July 2022.
On 24 July 2022, Iluna, the sixth wave of Nijisanji EN, debuted. The first English-speaking, mixed-gender wave to debut, Iluna included Maria Marionette, Kyo Kaneko, Aia Amare, Aster Arcadia, Scarle Yonaguni, and Ren Zotto.
On 9 December 2022, XSOLEIL, the seventh wave of Nijisanji EN, debuted. This was the second English-speaking, mixed-gender wave to debut, and included Doppio Dropscythe, Meloco Kyoran, Hex Haywire, Kotoka Torahime, Ver Vermillion, and Zaion LanZa.
On 14 December 2022, Anycolor announced the immediate graduation of Nijisanji EN Liver Yugo Asuma of Noctyx. The notice stated that Yugo's graduation was a result of discussions between the company and Yugo regarding aspects of his activities and behavior as a Liver. Both parties concluded that it would be best to part ways.


=== 2023 ===
On 23 January 2023, Nijisanji announced AR Live "Colors," a concert featuring the members of the LazuLight, Obsidiya, Ethyria, Luxiem and Noctyx, waves. The event was split into two parts, Pastel Stage and Vivid Stage. Pastel Stage would feature Finana Ryugu, Pomu Rainpuff, Elira Pendora, Rosemi Lovelock, Selen Tatsuki, Petra Gurin, Enna Alouette, Nina Kosaka, Reimu Endō, and Millie Parfait, and Vivid Stage Luca Kaneshiro, Vox Akuma, Shu Yamino, Mysta Rias, Ike Eveland, Sonny Brisko, Fulgur Ovid, Alban Knox, and Uki Violeta. The parts were set to air at 12:00 JST on 8 April and 9 April, respectively. However, the event was canceled on 2 February due to delays caused by COVID-19 pandemic.
On 10 March 2023, Anycolor terminated Nijisanji EN Liver Zaion LanZa of XSOLEIL, citing multiple violations of her contract and rules set out by the agency, including copyright infringement and making "offensive remarks regarding discrimination and sexual assault". However, many of the allegations were disputed in a document released by VTuber Sayu Sincronisity.
On 23 March 2023, Nijisanji temporarily suspended Gundo Mirei after she posted a baseball-related tweet that offended Japanese baseball fans pushing Anycolor to suspend her. Mirei was tweeting her reaction to the ongoing WBC (World Baseball Classic). In a tweet thread she voiced her misunderstandings about baseball and made seemingly sarcastic jokes and comments about how baseball could be improved. Since her suspension, Mirei Gundo had not posted on social media or streamed. She eventually announced her graduation on 21 June 2023.
On 24 June 2023, Krisis, the eighth wave of Nijisanji EN, debuted. A male trio, this wave included Vezalius Bandage, Vantacrow Bringer, and Yu Q. Wilson.
On 26 June 2023, Nijisanji EN Liver Nina Kosaka of Ethyria announced her graduation, set for 8 July.
On 23 July 2023, Nijisanji EN Liver Mysta Rias of Luxiem announced his graduation, set for 27 August.
On 21 October 2023, Nijisanji announced the graduation of Xia Ekavira, Mika Melatika, and Riksa Dhirendra. The talents, who were previously part of Nijisanji's Indonesia branch, are part of a growing list of former Nijisanji Indonesia talents graduating from the agency. Past graduations include ZEA Cornelia, Taka Radjiman, Siska Leontyne, Amicia Michella, Azura Cecillia, Nara Haramaung, Reza Avanluna, and Hyona Eliatora. All of these graduations have happened following the merge of the agency's Indonesian and Korean branches to the main Japanese branch. The three graduated on 17 November 2023, 28 December 2023, and 11 January 2024, respectively.
On 27 October 2023, TTT, the ninth wave of Nijisanji EN, debuted. This wave was formed of Kunai Nakasato, Victoria Brightshield and Claude Clawmark.
On 12 December 2023, Nijisanji announced the graduation of two livers, Chihiro Yuki and Momo Azuchi. They graduated on 31 January 2024.


=== 2024 ===
On 5 January 2024, Nijisanji EN Liver Pomu Rainpuff of LazuLight announced her graduation, set for 20 January 2024.
On 1 February 2024, Nijisanji EN Liver Kyo Kaneko of Iluna announced his graduation, set for 17 February 2024.
On 13 May 2024, Nijisanji announced the graduation of Liver Bonnivier Pranaja, formerly of Nijisanji ID, set for 26 May 2024.
The tenth generation of Nijisanji EN, Denauth, was announced on 21 May, with the group's debut set for 25 May. The group consists of three members: Ryoma Barrenwort, Twisty Amanozako, and Klara Charmwood.
On 22 July 2024, Nijisanji announced the graduation of Liver Suzuya Aki, set for 31 August 2024.
On 7 August 2024, Nijisanji announced the graduation of EN Liver Hex Haywire, set for 23 August 2024.
On 2 September 2024, Nijisanji announced the graduation of TTT member Kunai Nakasato. Her graduation was set for 21 September 2024 but would not be accompanied by a graduation stream by her request.
On 24 October 2024, Nijisanji announced the graduation of TTT member Victoria Brightshield. She would be the second member of TTT to graduate in 2024, leaving Claude Clawmark as the sole remaining member. Her graduation was set for 9 November.


=== 2025 ===
On 31 January 2025, Nijisanji announced the graduation of Liver Seto Miyako, set for 4 March.
The eleventh generation of Nijisanji EN, BY THE BEAT, was announced on 12 March, with the group's debut on 15 March. The group consists of four members: Zeal Ginjoka, Freodore, Seible, and Kaelix Debonair.
On 19 April 2025, Nijisanji announced the graduation of EN Liver Fulgur Ovid, set for 5 May.
On 29 April 2025, Nijisanji announced the immediate graduation of Luxiem EN Liver Ike Eveland, set for 30 April.
On 22 May 2025, Nijisanji announced the graduation of EN Liver Kotoka Torahime, set for 28 May.
On 21 June 2025, Nijisanji announced the termination of Denauth EN Liver Twisty Amanozako due to discriminatory speech.
On 14 July 2025, Nijisanji announced the immediate removal of ILUNA EN Liver Aster Arcadia and stated that he will not be resuming livestream duties.
On 2 August 2025, Nijisanji announced the graduation of Ethyria EN Liver Reimu Endou, set for 17 August.
On 12 August 2025, Nijisanji announced the graduation of Obsydia EN Liver Rosemi Lovelock, set for 29 August.


== Livers ==

Nijisanji members are called Virtual Livers or Livers, a portmanteau of "live streamers", and mainly stream on YouTube. Typical activities involve playing video games, singing or chatting with the audience. Over time, some Livers might get merchandise such as Nendoroid, pin-back buttons, acrylic stands, special voice packs, signed cards and more for anniversaries or special events.
Below are all current and former Livers associated with Nijisanji.


=== Nijisanji (Japan) ===


==== Nijisanji Gamers ====
Nijisanji Gamers was a group of Virtual Livers that specialized in gaming content. Originally managed as a separate branch, it was later dissolved and merged into the main Nijisanji group in December 2018. Post-merge, these Livers are also known as Ex-Gamers.


==== Nijisanji SEEDs ====
Nijisanji SEEDs was a Virtual Liver group themed around "living in the virtual world". Originally managed as a separate branch, it was later dissolved and merged into the main Nijisanji group in December 2018. Post-merge, these Livers are also known as Ex-SEEDs.


==== Post-2018 merger ====
At the end of 2018, Nijisanji, Nijisanji Gamers, and Nijisanji SEEDs were all merged into a single Japanese branch named Nijisanji. Post-merger, new Japanese debut groups are not identified by number. Prior to 2022, most debut groups were named by the Livers themselves after debuting.


==== Nijisanji ID ====
Previously Nijisanji's Indonesian branch, consisting of Indonesian-speaking Livers and aimed at Indonesian audiences. Originally operating as a separate branch, it was merged into the main Nijisanji branch on 15 April 2022. Post-merge, these Livers are also known as Ex-IDs.


==== Nijisanji KR ====
Previously Nijisanji's South Korean branch, consisting of Korean-speaking Livers and aimed at South Korean audiences. Originally operating as a separate branch, it was merged into the main NIJISANJI branch on 15 April 2022. Post-merge, these Livers are also known as Ex-KRs.


==== Post-2022 merger ====
Below is the list of Nijisanji Livers who debuted after Nijisanji ID and Nijisanji KR merged into the main branch.


=== Nijisanji EN ===


=== Former Livers ===


== Controversy ==
On 5 February 2024, the company announced the termination of Nijisanji EN Liver Selen Tatsuki's contract, effective immediately, after she had been inactive online for over a month, citing breaches of contract, violations of internal rules, misleading statements on social media, and actions causing payment delays for commissions to fan creators. The company received backlash from inside and outside the VTuber community afterwards.
The contents of Selen Tatsuki's notice of termination sparked controversy online. Multiple creators who worked with her refuted the claim that Selen had delayed their payments, and some stated that Nijisanji's management was responsible for the delayed payments. The notice also accused Selen of posting a song cover without proper authorization, leading to management unpublishing the video until authorizations were confirmed. It was later stated that the video portion had not yet been approved due to the inclusion of former Nijisanji Livers. It is unclear as to what specific rights were required, however, as Nijisanji owns the intellectual property for their character designs.
The final statements posted on Selen's Twitter page before its protection stated that she had been hospitalized at the end of December 2023. Independent VTuber Dokibird, the alternate account of the creator behind Selen, later stated that her hospitalization was due to a suicide attempt caused by poor management and a toxic environment.
In response to the situation, several Nijisanji EN Livers, including Enna Alouette, Fulgur Ovid, Finana Ryugu, Uki Violeta, and Meloco Kyoran, announced that they would be taking a break from their social media accounts.
On 7 February Japanese time, Nijisanji released an investor relations statement claiming that the decision to terminate Selen Tatsuki would have a negligible effect on its finances. Yahoo! Finance users criticized Nijisanji's inability to retain talent and its handling of Selen's termination.
Later that day, in North American Time, Hyte, a custom PC case and accessory maker, announced that in response to the current situation, it had terminated its current projects with Nijisanji.
On 12 February, Nijisanji EN Liver Elira Pendora premiered a YouTube video addressing the situation. In the video, Elira and two other Livers, Vox Akuma and Ike Eveland, claimed that the company had been receiving documents from Selen's lawyer that contained false accusations and personal information of other Livers, which raised concerns of doxxing. They reiterated the claim that Selen had posted the cover without waiting for permission from management and that it was set to be rereleased once approved, showing a screenshot of a partial Slack conversation. Some Livers reached out to Selen regarding her reaction to the incident, which was allegedly cited by Selen's lawyers as part of the bullying and harassment allegations. Vox and Ike expressed that they felt hurt and sad by the contents of the documents made by someone they "considered a good friend". In particular, Vox stated that the document cited a secretly recorded voice call as evidence of favoritism within the agency. Overall, this statement was received poorly on the internet, with many accusing the talents of reading from a script and questioning why the video was posted ahead of an official statement from management. The scheduled release of the video coincided with Dokibird's first gaming stream. Dokibird made a Tweet in response to the video asserting that the document was not supposed to be shared outside of the legal department, and speculated whether confidential information had been incorrectly shared, which could also violate privacy law. On 13 February, both parties revealed that no confidential information had been disclosed. Dokibird expanded on her response on 14 February, apologizing for her inclusion of the recording of Vox in the document and expressed her sentiment of wanting to move on and for the public to not inquire about further details.
Later that day, Anycolor CEO Riku Tazumi released a statement addressing the controversy via the Nijisanji EN Official YouTube channel. He clarified that the investor relations statement was meant only for investors, but acknowledged that the language used was inappropriate.

Our wording lacked consideration for the situation and caused NIJISANJI EN fans and everyone who supports the VTuber industry to feel that ANYCOLOR Inc. undervalued the impact of Selen’s contract termination, or Selen herself. I deeply regret this outcome and will be rethinking how our communication in English is done.
He also stated the importance of Tatsuki in cultivating the growth of Nijisanji. In terms of cultivating a safe environment, Tazumi acknowledged that the conflict has not only affected them as a company but also the overall well-being of their talents. Tazumi also acknowledged the lack of content in Nijisanji EN and promised to work on it by recruiting more staff to this division to aid in the agency's other content offerings aside from the typical content. Lastly, he commented that talents are "irreplaceable" and that beyond business partners, they are the most important individuals that they must protect as a company.


== Events ==
Nijisanji Music Festival: Powered by DMM music (2 October 2019)
Virtual to Live in Ryōgoku Kokugikan (8 December 2019)
Nijisanji Anniversary Festival 2021 Eve Festival feat. Flow (27–28 February 2021)
Nijisanji Japan Tour 2020 "Shout in the Rainbow! Tokyo Revenge Performance" (27 February 2021) – at Tokyo Big Sight, Ariake, Tokyo. Live Concert with online stream and limited audience due to COVID restriction.
Nijisanji AR Stage "Light Up Tones" (31 July – 1 August 2021)
Nijisanji held two concerts at Yokohama Pia Arena MM over two days from 30 to 31 October 2021:
"Nijirock Next Beat" with 7 livers on 30 October.
"initial step in Nijisanji" with 8 livers from First Wave on 31 October.


== Awards and nominations ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website