RecargaPay is a Brazilian mobile payments app company that provides online financial services for banked and unbanked individuals nationwide. It was founded in 2010 by Rodrigo Teijeiro, Alvaro Teijeiro, and Gustavo Victorica. The company has over 600 employees based mainly in São Paulo, Buenos Aires, Argentina, and Miami, USA, and has reported over 10 million active users.
The platform operates as a digital wallet, allowing users to perform a range of financial transactions, including mobile phone and public transport card top-ups, as well as bill and invoice payments. In addition, the service provides options for applying for credit cards and personal loans directly through the application.


== History ==
The company was founded in 2010 by brothers Rodrigo and Álvaro Teijeiro, currently CEO and CTO respectively, and Gustavo Victorica, current COO.
Recarga.com operated in Latin America and in the United States under the ownership of Fnbox, a technology holding company that manages various online businesses. By August 2012, the company had processed transactions in six countries for 110,000 customers across more than twenty mobile carriers.
In 2013, Fnbox began a process of dismemberment to focus exclusively on the mobile recharge business. Consequently, Recarga.com became RecargaPay, and diversified its product offering.
Since its launch, RecargaPay has recorded over 30 million app downloads and raised more than USD 120 million through multiple funding rounds. Notable investors include the International Finance Corporation (IFC), IDB Invest, and Fuel Venture Capital.
RecargaPay is authorised by the Central Bank of Brazil as a Payment Institution (electronic money issuer), Direct Credit Society (SCD, licensed October 2021), and Credit, Financing, and Investment Society (SCFI, licensed in 2024).


== Services ==

RecargaPay allows payments through credit card, debit card, PIX, or its wallet which can be loaded via Pix or credit card.
Merchants can resell RecargaPay’s services to attract customers, offering mobile phone recharges and bill payments. The business account also provides additional features, such as credit cards with cashback and payment collection methods, including payment links and tap-to-pay options.

Cell phone recharges
RecargaPay supports multiple carriers: Claro, TIM, Vivo, Oi, Correios, Sercomtel, Algar, and Surf Telecom. It offers scheduled recharges, and an Offline Recharge option for those without credits.

Transport card recharge
The service covers transportation cards from various cities, such as Bilhete Único and Cartão TRI. The company offers this service to over 30 transportation cards through the country, reaching more than 60 cities.
Personal Loans
RecargaPay also offers a personal loan service through its app. Eligible users can access pre-approved credit directly via the app, with a simplified application process and installment payment options. Loan availability is subject to credit analysis and the terms and conditions established by the company.
Credit Cards
RecargaPay issues credit cards in standard, Black, and Platinum versions. It also offers a “limite garantido” card (a secured-limit product), in which the spending limit is backed by a user deposit and defined through the app.


== Accolades ==
In 2016, RecargaPay was nominated in two categories of the Latam Founders Awards: Most Innovative Company and Best B2C Company, losing in both nominations for Pipefy and Nubank, respectively. At the ReclameAqui Awards, RecargaPay received honors for four consecutive years: it achieved third place for Online Payments two times, the second place for Financial Solutions and the fifth place for Digital Payment Method.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website