ReelShort is an American-based company owned by Crazy Maple Studio, which is backed and partially owned by Beijing-based digital publisher COL Group. It is a short-form video streaming app specializing in duanjus designed for mobile viewing, often referred to as vertical entertainment.
ReelShort's duanjus (short drama) emphasize rapid plot twists, heightened emotional conflicts, and minimal character development. The production values are notably low, with simple sets, costumes, and a cast of predominantly unknown actors.


== Background ==
Despite the failure of similar short-format television platforms in the United States, such as the closure of Quibi in 2020, it has become a popular format in China. Initially filling a void created by movie theater closures during the COVID-19 pandemic, duanju became popular with Chinese viewers seeking quick entertainment. ReelShort was founded in August 2022 to introduce duanju to an international audience.
In January 2024, French outlets including France Inter, France Info, Midi Libre and Courrier International introduced ReelShort as the “TikTok of series,” marking its first broad media coverage in France.


== Production ==
Crazy Maple Studio, the production company behind ReelShort, it was founded with the intention of introducing duanjus to an international audience. The studio maintains an additional office in Shenzhen, China.


== Business model ==
ReelShort uses a virtual currency system where users can purchase coins to unlock additional episodes of their shows.  These coins can be acquired by watching advertisements within the app or by purchasing them directly.
Reelshort has seen a 992% increase in downloads between 2023 and 2024, from 3.4 million in Q1 2023 to 37 million in early 2024.
In 2025, the app reportedly reached over 370 million downloads and generated $700 million in revenue.


== Programs ==
Move Aside! I’m the Final Boss starring Adam Daniel
You Fired a Tech Genius
Don't Miss Me When I'm Gone
Fated to My Forbidden Alpha
Married at First Sight
Never Divorce a Secret Billionaire Heiress
Snatched a Billionaire to Be My Husband
Son-in-Law's Revenge
The CEO's Contract Wife
The Double Life of My Billionaire Husband
True Luna
True Heiress vs. Fake Queen Bee
Maid for my Nemesis
The Virgin's Bucket List
Love Me Two Times
Daddy December
Breaking the Ice
The Senator's Son
Saved by the Sexy Cowboy
Wings of Fire: The Dragon Slayer Is My Ex-Lover
The Cursed Alpha's Mute Bride
Mommy Don’t Cry, Daddy is Sorry
Summer Situationship
The Lost Son Returns as the Duke (in production)


== See also ==
Duanju
DramaBox


== References ==