Stand by Me is a 1986 American coming-of-age drama film directed by Rob Reiner. Based on Stephen King's 1982 novella The Body, the film is set in the fictional town of Castle Rock in 1959. Stand by Me stars Wil Wheaton, River Phoenix, Corey Feldman, and Jerry O'Connell as four boys who set out on a journey to find the dead body of a missing boy. The film's title is derived from the 1961 song of the same name by Ben E. King, which plays during the film's closing credits.
Stand by Me received positive reviews upon release and was a commercial success. The film was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and for two Golden Globe Awards (Best Drama Motion Picture and Best Director). Rolling Stone has called Stand by Me "a staple of youthful nostalgia" and "the rare movie that necessarily gets better with time".


== Plot ==
In 1985, writer Gordon "Gordie" Lachance reads a newspaper article about the death of his childhood best friend, Chris Chambers. In an extended flashback, Gordie tells about his experiences on Labor Day weekend in 1959, when he was 12 years old.
On that Labor Day weekend, Gordie is with Chris Chambers and two other friends, Teddy Duchamp and Vern Tessio, in a treehouse in their hometown of Castle Rock. Vern tells the other boys that he overheard his older brother, Billy, talking with a friend about finding the body of a missing boy named Ray Brower outside of town. Billy did not tell the police of his discovery because doing so would likely have led the police to discover a car theft he and his friend committed. Gordie, Chris, Teddy, and Vern decide to look for the body themselves, believing that discovering the body could make them local heroes. After Chris steals his father's Colt M1911A1 pistol, he and Gordie run into town bully John "Ace" Merrill and Chris' older brother, Richard "Eyeball" Chambers. Ace threatens Chris with a lit cigarette and steals Gordie's Yankees cap; the cap had been a gift from Gordie's older brother, Denny, who had died in an accident earlier that year.
The boys begin their journey. After stopping at a junkyard for water, they are caught trespassing by owner Milo Pressman and his dog, Chopper. Milo calls Teddy's mentally ill veteran father a "loony" and says that he almost burned Teddy's ear off. An enraged Teddy tries to attack Milo, but the other boys restrain him. The four continue their hike, and Chris encourages Gordie to fulfill his potential as a writer despite his father's disapproval. Later, Gordie and Vern are nearly hit by a passing train while crossing a train bridge.
In the evening, Gordie tells a story he created about the fictional character of David "Lard-Ass" Hogan, an obese boy who is constantly bullied. Seeking payback, Lard-Ass downs a bottle of castor oil and eats a raw egg before entering a pie-eating contest. During the contest, Lard-Ass throws up deliberately, which leads to mass vomiting among the other contestants and the audience. Gordie calls the event a "barf-o-rama".
Later that night, Chris tells Gordie that he hates being associated with his family's poor reputation. He admits to having stolen milk money at school, but says he confessed his theft to a teacher and returned the money. Nevertheless, he was suspended from school because the teacher kept quiet and pocketed the money. Devastated by the teacher's betrayal, Chris breaks down and cries.
The next day, the boys wade across a swamp, discovering that it is filled with leeches. Gordie faints after removing a leech from his genitals. After Gordie regains consciousness, the boys continue hiking and locate Ray Brower's body. The discovery traumatizes Gordie; he asks Chris why his brother Denny had to die and cries, stating that his father hates him. Chris comforts Gordie and asserts that his father simply does not know him.
Ace and his gang arrive to claim the body and threaten to hurt the boys if they do not leave. When Chris refuses, Ace draws a switchblade. Gordie uses Chris's father's pistol to fire a warning shot and comes to Chris' defense. Ace demands that Gordie turn over the weapon, but Gordie refuses, calling Ace a "cheap dime store hood". Ace vows revenge and leaves with his gang. Gordie and his friends decide that seeking recognition for finding Brower's body would be wrong; instead, they report it anonymously. They arrive home the next morning and part ways.
Back in 1985, Gordie is finishing a memoir about the events of Labor Day weekend in 1959. He notes that Vern and Teddy drifted apart from him and Chris in junior high. Chris later became a lawyer, and Gordie eventually lost touch with him. Recently, while attempting to break up a fight, Chris was stabbed to death. Gordie writes that despite not having seen Chris in over a decade, he will miss him forever. He ends his narration with the following words: "I never had any friends later on like the ones I had when I was twelve. Jesus, does anyone?"


== Cast ==


== Production ==


=== Development ===

The film was adapted from the Stephen King novella The Body. Bruce A. Evans sent a copy of The Body to Karen Gideon, the wife of his friend and writing partner Raynold Gideon, on August 29, 1983, as a gift for her birthday. Both Gideon and Evans quickly became fans of the novella and shortly thereafter contacted King's agent, Kirby McCauley, seeking to negotiate film rights; McCauley replied that King's terms were $100,000 and 10% of the gross profits. Although the money was not an issue, the share of gross profits was considered excessive, especially considering that no stars could be featured to help sell the movie. In response, Evans and Gideon pursued an established director, Adrian Lyne, to help sell the project.
After reading the novella, Lyne teamed up with Evans and Gideon, but all the studios the trio approached turned the project down except for Martin Shafer at Embassy Pictures. Embassy spent four months negotiating the rights with McCauley, settling on $50,000 and a smaller share of the profits, and Evans and Gideon spent eight weeks writing the screenplay. Evans and Gideon asked to also produce the film, but Shafer suggested they team up with Andrew Scheinman, a more experienced producer. Embassy was unwilling to meet Lyne's salary for directing the film until Evans and Gideon agreed to give up half of their share of profits to meet Lyne's asking price.
Lyne was going to direct the film, but would not have been available to start production until the spring of 1986. Reiner, who had just started his directing career, was sent the script by Scheinman; his initial reaction was that the script had promise but "no focus". After Lyne withdrew from the project, Reiner signed on to direct in September 1984. 
In a 2011 interview, Reiner discussed his realization that the film should focus on the character of Gordie:

"In the book, it was about four boys, but...once I made Gordie the central focus of the piece then it made sense to me: this movie was all about a kid who didn't feel good about himself and whose father didn't love him. And through the experience of going to find the dead body and his friendship with these boys, he began to feel empowered and went on to become a very successful writer. He basically became Stephen King."
Reiner has said that he identified with Gordie, as he himself struggled with the shadow of fame cast by his comedian father, Carl Reiner. The writers incorporated Reiner's suggestions, producing a new script by December 1984 for Embassy's review and approval.
Days before the shooting started in the summer of 1985, Embassy was sold to Columbia Pictures, which made plans to cancel the production. Norman Lear, one of the co-owners of Embassy and the developer of All in the Family, gave $7.5 million of his own money to complete the film, citing his faith in Reiner and the script. However, since Embassy also would have distributed the film, once the film was completed it had no distributor. The producers showed a print to Michael Ovitz, head of the powerful Creative Artists Agency, and Ovitz promised to help them find a distributor. Paramount, Universal Pictures, and Warner Bros. all passed on the film; Columbia Pictures production head Guy McElwaine screened the film at his house because he was feeling ill, and the positive reaction of his daughters convinced him to distribute the film. 
In March 1986, Columbia Pictures, concerned that the original title, The Body, was misleading, renamed the film Stand by Me. According to screenwriter Raynold Gideon, The Body "sounded like either a sex film, a bodybuilding film, or another Stephen King horror film. Rob came up with Stand by Me, and it ended up being the least unpopular option." The film's name is derived from Ben E. King's 1961 song, "Stand by Me", which plays during the ending credits.


=== Casting ===
In a 2011 interview with NPR, Wil Wheaton attributed the film's success to the director's casting choices:Rob Reiner found four young boys who were the characters we played. I was awkward and nerdy and shy and uncomfortable in my skin and sensitive, and River was cool and smart and passionate and even at that age kind of like a father figure to some of us, Jerry was one of the funniest people I had ever seen in my life, either before or since, and Corey was unbelievably angry and in an incredible amount of pain and had a terrible relationship with his parents.
Feldman recalled how his home life translated into his onscreen character: "[Most kids aren't] thinking they're going to get hit by their parents because they're not doing well enough in school, which will prevent them from getting a work permit, which will prevent them from being an actor." O'Connell agreed that he was cast based on how his personality fit the role, saying "Rob wanted us to understand our characters. He interviewed our characters. [...] I tried to stay like Vern and say the stupid things Vern would. I think I was Vern that summer." Reiner and the producers interviewed more than 70 boys for the four main roles, out of more than 300 who auditioned; Phoenix originally read for the part of Gordie Lachance. Ethan Hawke auditioned for Chris Chambers.
Before filming began, Reiner put the four main actors together for two weeks to play games from Viola Spolin's Improvisation for the Theater (which Reiner called "the bible" of theater games) and build camaraderie. As a result, a friendship developed among the actors. Wheaton would later recall, "When you saw the four of us being comrades, that was real life, not acting."
Before settling on Richard Dreyfuss to portray the adult Gordie, Reiner considered David Dukes, Ted Bessell, and Michael McKean.


=== Filming ===

Principal photography began on June 17 and ended on August 23, 1985.
Parts of the film were shot in Brownsville, Oregon, which stood in for the fictional town of Castle Rock. Located between Salem and Eugene, the town was selected for its small-town 1950s ambience; approximately 100 local residents were employed as extras.
The "barf-o-rama" scene was also filmed in Brownsville. A local bakery supplied the pies and extra filling, which was mixed with large-curd cottage cheese to simulate the vomit. The quantity of simulated vomit varied per person, from as much as 5 US gallons (19 L) during the triggering event to as little as 1⁄16 US gallon (0.24 L).

The scene where Teddy tries to dodge a train was filmed on McCloud River Railroad 19. 
The scene where the boys outrace a steam engine across an 80-foot-tall (24 m) trestle was filmed above Lake Britton Reservoir near McArthur-Burney Falls Memorial State Park on the McCloud River Railroad in northeastern California. That scene took a full week to shoot, and it required the use of four small adult female stunt doubles with closely cropped hair who were made up to look like the film's protagonists. Plywood planks were laid across the ties to provide a safer surface on which the stunt doubles could run. The film crew even brought a brand-new camera for use in the shot, only for it to jam between the rails on the first shot. As of 2016, the locomotive used for the scene--McCloud Railway 25--remained in daily operation for excursion service on the Oregon Coast Scenic Railroad. Telephoto compression was used to make the train appear much closer than it actually was. The actors did not feel a sense of danger until Reiner threatened them by saying, "You see those guys? They don't want to push that dolly down the track anymore. And the reason they're getting tired is because of you... I told them if they weren't worried that the train was going to kill them, then they should worry that I was going to. And that's when they ran."
At Reiner's insistence, the cigarettes smoked by the child actors in the film were made of cabbage leaves.


== Music ==
Jack Nitzsche composed the film's musical score. On August 8, 1986, a soundtrack album was released containing many of the 1950s and early 1960s oldies songs featured in the film:

"Everyday" (Buddy Holly) – 2:07
"Let the Good Times Roll" (Shirley and Lee) – 2:22
"Come Go with Me" (The Del-Vikings) – 2:40
"Whispering Bells" (The Del-Vikings) – 2:25
"Get a Job" (The Silhouettes) – 2:44
"Lollipop" (The Chordettes) – 2:09
"Yakety Yak" (The Coasters) – 1:52
"Great Balls of Fire" (Jerry Lee Lewis) – 1:52
"Mr. Lee" (The Bobbettes) – 2:14
"Stand by Me" (Ben E. King) – 2:55
The movie's success sparked a renewed interest in Ben E. King's song "Stand by Me". Initially a number four pop hit in 1961, the song re-entered the Billboard Hot 100 in October 1986, eventually peaking at number nine in December of that year.


=== Charts ===


=== Certifications ===


== Reception ==


=== Box office ===
The film was a box office success in North America. It opened in a limited release in 16 theaters on August 8, 1986, and grossed $242,795, averaging $15,174 per theater. The film then had its wide opening in 745 theaters on August 22 and grossed $3,812,093, averaging $5,116 per theater and ranking number 2. The film's widest release was 848 theaters, and it ended up earning $52,287,414 overall, well above its $8 million budget.


=== Critical response ===
On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 92% based on 64 reviews and a rating average of 8/10. The website's critical consensus reads: "Stand by Me is a wise, nostalgic movie with a weird streak that captures both Stephen King's voice and the trials of growing up." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 75 out of 100 based on 20 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.
Reviewing the film for The New York Times, Walter Goodman opined that Reiner's direction was rather self-conscious, "looking constantly at his audience". While the lead actors were "individually likable", Goodman called the film a "trite narrative" and said that "Reiner's direction hammers in every obvious element in an obvious script." In his review for the Chicago Tribune, Dave Kehr wrote that there was "nothing natural in the way Reiner has overloaded his film with manufactured drama". In contrast, Sheila Benson called the film "[a treasure] absolutely not to be missed" in her review for the Los Angeles Times. Paul Attanasio, reviewing for The Washington Post, called the acting ensemble "wonderful" and particularly praised the performances of Wheaton and Phoenix.
Stephen King was very impressed with the film. On the special features of the 25th anniversary Blu-ray set, King indicated that he considered the film to be the first successful translation to film of any of his works. According to a later interview with Gene Siskel, Reiner recalled that after a private early screening of the film, King excused himself for fifteen minutes to compose himself; he later returned to remark, "'That's the best film ever made out of anything I've written, which isn't saying much. But you've really captured my story. It is autobiographical.'" In a 2016 interview, King said that Stand by Me was his favorite adaptation of his work, alongside The Shawshank Redemption.


=== Awards ===

At the 8th Youth in Film Awards, the film received the Jackie Coogan Award for Outstanding Contribution to Youth Through Motion Picture – Ensemble Cast in a Feature Film (Wil Wheaton, River Phoenix, Corey Feldman, and Jerry O'Connell).

Nominations
Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay (Raynold Gideon and Bruce A. Evans)
Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film (Rob Reiner)
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Golden Globe Award for Best Director (Rob Reiner)
Independent Spirit Award for Best Film (Andrew Scheinman, Raynold Gideon, and Bruce A. Evans)
Independent Spirit Award for Best Director (Rob Reiner)
Independent Spirit Award for Best Screenplay (Raynold Gideon and Bruce A. Evans)
National Board of Review Awards 1986 Top Ten Films (awarded)
Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Screenplay (Raynold Gideon and Bruce A. Evans)


== Legacy ==
In a 2011 piece entitled "25 years of Stand by Me", writer Alex Hannaford opined that "[for] anyone older than about 33, Stand by Me remains one of the greatest films to come out of the Eighties." Hannaford added that the film "has a charm and depth that seems to resonate with each generation".
In 2016, several writers commemorated the 30-year anniversary of the film's release. Rolling Stone's Charles Bramesco called Stand By Me "timeless", "a staple of youthful nostalgia for its deft straddling of the line between childhood and adulthood", and "the rare movie that necessarily gets better with time". Others described the film as a "coming-of-age classic" and as a film that stood at "the apex of the '80s kids' movie boom".


=== Events and tourism ===
Brownsville, Oregon has held an annual "Stand By Me Day" since 2007. The event has attracted international participants. On July 24, 2010, a 25th Anniversary celebration of the filming of Stand by Me was held in Brownsville. The event included a cast and crew Q&A session, an amateur pie-eating contest, and an outdoor showing of the film.
In 2013, July 23 was designated as Stand By Me Day by the Brownsville Chamber of Commerce. To encourage tourism, the city has embedded a penny in the street at a location where the fictional Vern found one in the film. An advertising mural painted for the movie production has survived.
Following the July 2024 Stand By Me Day, its event organizers—after input from businesses, fans, volunteers—decided to schedule the annual event for the fourth Saturday of July.


=== Film ===

The Oscar-nominated urban drama Boyz n the Hood has several direct references to Stand by Me, including a trip by four young children to see a dead body, and the closing fade-out of one of the main characters. Director John Singleton stated that he included the references because he was a fan of the movie.
The 1995 coming-of-age film Now and Then is often cited as the "female alternative" to Stand by Me.
Jonathan Bernstein states the pop culture discussions between characters in films by Quentin Tarantino originate in the similar semi-serious banter between the boys of Stand by Me.
Reviewers have seen an influence from Stand by Me in the 2011 movie Attack the Block, directed by Joe Cornish.
The movie Mud (2012) has a character (Neckbone) who has been called a "perfect fusion of River Phoenix and Jerry O'Connell in Stand by Me". The writer and director, Jeff Nichols, said of the film "Yeah, you know, I basically remade Stand by Me" when defending the work-in-progress to studio executives.
The Kings of Summer, a 2013 coming-of-age film by Jordan Vogt-Roberts, has been reviewed as being inspired by Stand by Me.
Love and Monsters (2020) includes an excerpt of the song "Stand by Me" and shortly after a scene involving large poisonous leeches.


=== Music ===
Dan Mangan's song "Rows of Houses" (2011) is based on the film and takes the perspective of Gordie Lachance.


=== Production company ===
In 1987, following the success of Stand by Me, Reiner co-founded a film and television production company and named it Castle Rock Entertainment, after the fictional town in which the film is set.


=== Television ===
Seinfeld, the first television show produced by Reiner's Castle Rock production company, featured banter between Jerry Seinfeld and George Costanza that was reminiscent of the dialogue between the protagonists of Stand by Me.
The plotline of "The Blunder Years", a 2001 episode from the thirteenth season of The Simpsons, revolves around a repressed childhood trauma in which Homer Simpson, along with his friends Lenny and Carl, discover a body blocking an inlet for the Springfield Quarry.
The Rick and Morty episode "The Ricklantis Mixup" makes references to the film with four multi-verse Mortys, and another reference during a campfire.
The web television series Do You Want to See a Dead Body? is inspired by the film, and named after a quote from it.
In the Family Guy season 7 episode "Three Kings" which aired on May 10, 2009, the first segment of the episode parodies the whole film.
In the season 2, episode 6 of the HBO series Euphoria, Fezco (Angus Cloud) and Lexi (Maude Apatow), are seen watching Stand by Me and singing the song of the same name together.


=== Video games ===
The film is referenced in Pokémon Red, Green, Blue, and Yellow for the Nintendo Game Boy, as well their Game Boy Advance remakes, Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen, where the player character's mother is watching the movie on TV. When interacting with the TV, the player character says: "There's a movie on TV. Four boys are walking on railroad tracks. I better go too." This reference exists in both the original Japanese versions and the English localizations, though the reference changes to The Wizard of Oz in the remakes when the female player character is selected.


== References ==


== External links ==

Stand by Me at IMDb
Stand by Me at the TCM Movie Database
Stand by Me at Box Office Mojo
"Stand By Me". Then & Now Movie Locations [blog]. October 2012. Retrieved April 13, 2017.


=== Reviews ===
Denby, David (August 18, 1986). "Roughing It". New York Magazine. pp. 58–59. Retrieved May 1, 2017.
Franco, James (August 1, 2013). "Keep Standing by Me". Vice. Retrieved May 1, 2017.