Transit is a mobile app providing real-time public transit data. The app functions in over 995 metropolitan areas across 28 countries around the world. 


== Description ==
Transit was designed for aggregating and mapping real-time public transit data as well as crowdsourcing user data to determine the true location of buses and trains. Transit was first released in 2012 for iPhone and soon after launched the Android-compatible version. 
Transit offers users schedules and alerts for multiple modes of transportation where available, including bus and rail. Transit was developed in Montreal, Quebec, Canada by Sam Vermette and Guillaume Campagna with the goal of minimizing the need for individuals to own vehicles in cities. 
Transit is in direct competition with other transit mapping services such as Moovit and Citymapper, as well as general mapping services that also provide transit data such as Google Maps, Bing Maps, and Apple Maps.
Current Transit app executives are Chief Executive Officer Sam Vermette and Chief Business Officer David Block-Schachter. In 2018, Transit raised $17.5 million. The majority of investments came from auto manufacturers. The lead investor was Alliance Ventures. Others included Jaguar Land Rover's venture capital fund, InMotion Ventures, Accel, and Real Ventures.


=== Features ===
Transit is compatible with car-sharing and ride-hailing apps such as Uber, Lyft, Via, and Ola, along with multiple bike-share systems. In April 2018, the app expanded to include scooter-sharing systems in four American cities. The app provides users with a color-coded system that matches colors with modes of transportation in order for users to quickly associate a color with the mode of transportation they are monitoring.
In February 2019, the Transit app released an update that allowed users to look up bus and train schedules for their whole city even without a data connection, or determine if a bike-sharing station has bikes available. Even when users are offline, they are able to find the nearest public transport stops and map their journey.
In September 2024, bike routing was added to the app, with a focus on routing through safer bike paths.


=== Supported regions ===
Transit is supported in 28 countries across the globe including Argentina, Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Iceland, Italy, New Zealand, Sweden, the United Kingdom, United States and more. Transit is available in 995 cities and regions across the world.


== Partners ==
Transit supports multiple mobile ticketing platforms including Token Transit and Masabi. Users are only required to input their payment information into the app one time, and then able to purchase ride and bike-share passes within the app's interface.


=== Endorsers ===
Transit has partnered with some public agencies in Canada, in the United States and in France to become their official or endorsed multimodal app. Agencies that have endorsed the app include:
In Canada:

BC Transit
Société de transport de l'Outaouais
OC Transpo
Halifax Transit
Société de transport de Montréal
TransLink
Edmonton Transit Service
Calgary Transit
Roam Transit
In the United States:

Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority
Central Ohio Transit Authority
Capital Area Transportation Authority
Capital Metropolitan Transit Authority
Chicago Transit Authority
Suburban Mobility Authority for Regional Transportation
Green Mountain Transit (Vermont)
Los Angeles Metro (Metro)
Omnitrans
Maryland Transit Administration
Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority
Pinellas Suncoast Transit Authority
Pittsburgh Regional Transit
Santa Monica Big Blue Bus
Utah Transit Authority
Golden Gate Transit
Pioneer Valley Transit Authority
ABQ Ride
Transit Authority of Northern Kentucky
In France:

Blois
Châlons en champagne


== References ==