The Xbox app, also known as Xbox on PC and formerly known as Xbox PC, developed by Microsoft Gaming for Windows, Android, iOS and Tizen, is a companion app for users of Xbox video game consoles, providing access to Xbox network community features, remote control, as well as second screen functionality (formerly branded as SmartGlass) with selected games, applications, and content.
On Windows 10, the app additionally serves as a launcher for PC games installed on a device (including games obtained from Microsoft Store, Bethesda.net, Battle.net, Steam, GOG.com, Epic Games Store, Humble Bundle, Origin and Ubisoft Connect), provided access to the system's screen recording functions, and streaming of games from an Xbox One console on a local network.
During E3 2019, the existing version of the Xbox app for Windows 10 was renamed Xbox Console Companion, and a new Xbox app was introduced in beta. This app is more specifically oriented towards PC gaming, serving as a front-end to games distributed on Microsoft Store, and as the client for PC Game Pass.


== Features ==
Through the app, users can access their activity feed, Xbox Live friends and messages, manage their party, watch saved Game DVR clips, browse OneGuide, and view their achievements. Some games and apps can provide second screen integration via the app, displaying supplemental content. The app can also be used as a remote control for the console.
The Windows 10 version of Xbox Console Companion allows users to stream games from an Xbox One console over a local network, and has the ability to view and edit Game DVR recordings from an Xbox One console. It also serves as a front-end for a PC version of Game DVR on supported hardware (Game DVR settings were moved to the Settings app on Windows 10 version 1703), and has a library display for games installed on the device. The library view can also aggregate games installed from various third-party game launchers and stores.
Support for Xbox Cloud Gaming as well as Remote Play from Xbox consoles was added to the app on September 14, 2021.


== History ==

Xbox 360 SmartGlass was originally announced at E3 2012, for Windows 8, Android and iOS. Microsoft demonstrated use cases for the new app within both games and entertainment, including a minimap for Ascend: New Gods, a second screen experience for School of Rock with supplemental content, and Game of Thrones (with interactive maps and family tree diagrams). With the release of Xbox One in November 2013, Microsoft released an accompanying Xbox One SmartGlass app for Android, iOS, Windows 8.1, and Windows Phone, which contained more extensive functionality for controlling the console.
Windows 10 introduced a revamped version of SmartGlass referred to simply as Xbox, which notably added a library display for PC games, and the ability to stream games from an Xbox One console on a local network. On June 12, 2016, the mobile versions of the Xbox One Smartglass apps were updated for parity with the desktop version, and renamed "Xbox" as well. Xbox 360 SmartGlass was not updated and was discontinued in May 2018.
The mobile apps were updated alongside the Xbox One's May 2019 software update, adding cross-platform status indicators to friends. In May 2019, Microsoft also revamped the Xbox Game Bar feature of Windows 10 into a widget-based overlay, which features pop-up windows for features such as screen recording, managing audio inputs, viewing the Xbox Live friends list, and monitoring system components.
On June 9, 2019, coinciding with Microsoft's E3 2019 press conference, Microsoft released a new Xbox app in beta exclusively for Windows 10 May 2019 Update (version 1903), which has a redesigned interface, and serves as the client for Xbox Game Pass on PC. In advance of the conference, Microsoft rebranded the existing Xbox app on Windows 10 as Xbox Console Companion. The new Xbox app is pre-loaded software on Windows 11.
Microsoft updated its Xbox mobile app on Android in November 2024, allowing U.S. users to purchase and play Xbox games directly on their devices. This follows a U.S. court ruling that prevents Google from requiring its Play Billing system, enhancing choice for developers. The update  facilitates immediate streaming of purchased games via Xbox Cloud Gaming. Additionally, Microsoft is developing a browser-based Xbox mobile store, initially focusing on first-party games and later including deals and in-game items.


== See also ==
PlayStation App
Game Center
Google Play Games
Nintendo Switch Online
Comparison of screencasting software


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Xbox (beta) on Microsoft Store
Xbox Console Companion on Microsoft Store