Emory Andrew Tate III (born 1 December 1986) is an American and British social media personality, businessman, and former professional kickboxer who gained notoriety for promoting various highly controversial positions in the manosphere. His commentary has resulted in his expulsion from various social media platforms and concern that he promotes misogynistic views to his audience. A divisive influencer, Tate has amassed 10.7 million followers on Twitter as of June 2025 and was the third-most googled person in 2023. He has been dubbed the "king of toxic masculinity", has called himself a misogynist, and is politically described as both right-wing and far-right. As of March 2025, Tate is facing six legal investigations—four criminal and two civil—in Romania, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
From 2005, Tate began his kickboxing career in England, winning several kickboxing titles in the late 2000s and early 2010s. In 2016, he appeared on the British reality series Big Brother, but was removed, as he was the suspect in an open rape investigation in the United Kingdom. The investigation was later dropped, but Tate was subject to an extradition request for rape charges in 2024. After his kickboxing career, Tate and his brother, Tristan, began operating a webcam model business, then sold online courses. With his audience from his courses, he became prominent as an internet celebrity promoting a hyper-macho view of masculinity. Tate's courses include Hustler's University, which gained 100,000 subscribers and was later relaunched as The Real World, and the secretive group named The War Room, which the BBC has accused of coercing women into sex work and teaching violence against women. In August 2023, it was estimated that Tate's online ventures generated US$5 million in revenue monthly.
In December 2022, Tate and his brother, Tristan, were arrested in Romania, along with two women. In June 2023, all four were charged with rape, human trafficking, and forming an organised crime group to sexually exploit women. Soon after, accusers reportedly went into hiding after a campaign of online harassment, and the Tate brothers filed a defamation lawsuit, claiming $5 million in damages. In March 2024, British police obtained an arrest warrant for the Tate brothers. In July 2024, a civil case in the UK was brought against the brothers and a third person for alleged tax evasion. In August 2024, Romanian police raided four properties Tate owns and expanded its investigation to include trafficking minors, sex with a minor, money laundering and attempting to influence witnesses. Tate and his brother have denied all charges and allegations. In May 2025, the United Kingdom Crown Prosecution Service brought multiple charges against Tate and his brother Tristan including for rape, actual bodily harm and human trafficking.


== Early life ==
Emory Andrew Tate III was born on 1 December 1986 at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, D.C. He is multiracial; his African American father, Emory Tate (1958–2015), was a chess international master, while his White English mother, Eileen Tate, worked as a catering assistant. He has a younger brother, Tristan, and a younger sister, Janine. He was raised in Chicago, Illinois, and Goshen, Indiana. In 1997, after his parents divorced, his mother took him and his brother to Luton in Bedfordshire, England. They "lived on Marsh Farm, an infamously rough council estate which Tate has described as the 'worst area of the worst town.'" He was educated at Halyard High School and Luton Sixth Form College.


== Kickboxing career ==
Tate started practising boxing and other martial arts in 2005, and worked in the television advertising industry to support himself. Tate started his career in Full contact kickboxing and gained recognition after defeating former super cruiserweight British champions Ollie Green and Mo Kargbo which got him ranked the seventh-best light heavyweight kickboxer in the United Kingdom by the International Sport Kickboxing Association (ISKA) in November 2008.
In 2009, Tate fought and defeated Paul Randall to capture the English ISKA Full Contact Cruiserweight Championship and beat Daniel Hughes for the International Kickboxing Federation Full Contact Cruiserweight British Title receiving the top rank in his division across Europe. Tate's kickboxing nickname was "King Cobra". In 2010 Tate defeated Jamie Bates by knockout.
In 2011, Tate won his first International Sport Kickboxing Association (ISKA) full contact world title in a rematch against Jean-Luc Benoît via knockout, having previously lost to Benoît by decision. The weight was set at light heavyweight 81.5 kg. In August 2011, Tate made his K-1 Rules debut and fought in the Enfusion 3: Trial of the Gladiators tournament to determine the world's Number one kickboxer in the 85 kg category. Tate qualified for the tournament, stopping Sammy Masa by second-round KO and Adnan Omeragić by first-round KO. The tournament was later resumed in December 2012. In November 2011 Tate moved up to 85 kg to challenge Vincent Petitjean for the Nuit des Champions(NDC) full contact title. Tate lost by decision.
In 2012 after scoring a knockout win over Joe McCgovan, Tate would get the opportunity to fight Sahak Parparyan for his It's Showtime 85MAX Championship and would lose by unanimous decision. On 2 December 2012, Tate returned to the  Enfusion 3: Trial of the Gladiators tournament to determine the world's Number one kickboxer in the 85 kg category. Tate managed to score a victory in the semi-finals, knocking out Ritchie Hocking with punches in the first round, but lost in the final via a first-round flying knee KO from Franci Grajš who after the fight got named the best in the 85 Max weight division. Before his loss, he was ranked second-best 85 max light-heavyweight kickboxer in the world behind Sahak Parparyan.
In 2013, Tate returned to full contact kickboxing and won his second ISKA world title in a 12-round match against Vincent Petitjean in the Light Cruiserweight division, making him world champion in two weight classes. Tate returned to K-1 rules and managed to score four victories in the Enfusion ring during 2013 over David Radeff, Marino Schouten, Marlon Hunt, and Laszlo Szabo in the middleweight division.
Tate participated in a four-man tournament to determine the Enfusion 85 kg middleweight World Champion, alongside Miroslav Cingel, Jiří Žák, and Rustam Guseinov. Held in Žilina, Slovakia, on 26 April 2014, Tate lost in the semi-finals to local fighter and tournament winner, Miroslav Cingel, via unanimous decision. Tate defended the ISKA Full Contact Light Cruiserweight World Title against Cyril Vetter winning by knockout, won his first K-1 Rules World Title by defeating Wendell Roche to capture the Enfusion 90 kg Belt in 2014, making him a four-time world champion before he retired with 31 recorded fights.
In January 2015 Tate fought in K-1 in the event K-1 China vs. USA against Liang Ling. Tate won by decision. In March 2015 Tate returned to full contact kickboxing and faced Jean Luc Benoît in a trilogy fight to settle the score. Tate won by decision making the rivalry 2–1 in favor of Tate.
In December 2016, Tate returned to kickboxing to fight for the Enfusion 90 kg world title against Ibrahim El Boustati who was originally scheduled to face Marc de Bonte, however tragic events led to de Bonte's passing. Tate would lose by tko in round one due to an eye injury. Tate was later then forced into an early retirement due to his eye sustaining damage through his combat sport career which first began at just 23, when Tate experienced his first eye injury, with detached retinas in both eyes that required surgical repair. By the age of 30, when the condition resurfaced against Ibrahim, Tate then chose to retire from professional kickboxing. In 2020 Tate returned to kickboxing after a long layoff and competed in Romania against low level kickboxers scoring knockout wins over Miralem Ahmeti, Iulian Strugariu and Cosmin Lingurar.
Tate would retire again with a 76-9-1 record in kickboxing in the styles of k-1 rules and full contact. In k-1 rules, Tate managed to hold the Enfusion 90 kg world title, fought mainly in full contact achieving 3 ISKA world titles in 84.6 kg and 81.5 kg, making him a 4 time kickboxing world champion, while his brother Tristan claimed the ISKA British light cruiserweight title twice in k-1 rules and freestyle kickboxing who would also retire early with a 43–9 record due to sustaining a bad shoulder injury in a car accident preventing him from competing in kickboxing.
In 2023 Enfusion chose to establish a new label called T8KO which means Tate KO, Andrew Tate was initially scheduled to serve as a media partner alongside his brother Tristan. However, after Tate's arrest, Enfusion announced on Instagram that, "In consultation with the Dutch Fight Sports Authority, it has been decided that the Tate brothers will not be involved with the new label while the criminal investigation is still ongoing." Additionally, the Fight Sports Authority required Enfusion to rename their new brand, resulting in the name 8TKO.


== Big Brother ==
Tate gained widespread attention in 2016 when he appeared on the British reality television series Big Brother's 17th series. In the series, Tate was a member of a secret second house, part of a group called "The Others." While appearing on the show, he came under scrutiny for previously having made homophobic and racist posts on Twitter. He was removed from the show after six days, with producers saying that it was because of events outside the house and Tate saying that it was about a video which appeared to show him striking a woman with a belt on the show. Producers also said that he was not let go because of the uncovered tweets. Tate and the woman said that they were friends and that the actions in the video were consensual. Vice later reported that Tate was removed because the show's producers became aware of an ongoing police investigation by Hertfordshire Constabulary into him for rape, which closed in 2019 with no charges filed.


== Online ventures ==

Tate's website offers training courses on accumulating wealth and "male–female interactions". According to the site, he also operated a webcam studio using his girlfriends as employees. Tate and his brother, Tristan, started the webcam business, employing as many as 75 webcam models to sell "fake sob stories" to male callers, claiming to have made millions of dollars doing so. According to Mary McNamara, Tate has called himself "a pimp", and The Guardian wrote of his transition from a kickboxer to "a webcam pimp". Tate later acknowledged that the business model was a "total scam". In August 2023, it was estimated that The Real World and The War Room generated US$5 million monthly from subscriptions.


=== Hustler's University ===
Tate operated Hustler's University, a proprietary platform where members paid a US$49.99 monthly membership fee to receive instruction on ways to make money outside traditional employment, such as cryptocurrency, copywriting, and e-commerce, which was facilitated by prerecorded videos and a Discord server. The site employed an affiliate marketing program, where members received a commission for recruiting others to the platform.
Tate became prominent in 2022 by encouraging members of Hustler's University to post videos of him to social media platforms, in an effort to maximise engagement. An investigation by The Observer described "a network of copycat accounts on TikTok" that artificially amplified his content, with the social media platform appearing to allow the content to spread. Hustler's University was subsequently rebranded as Hustler University 2.0 and then Hustler University 3.0. The Irish-American financial services company Stripe pulled out of processing subscriptions for the platform, and Hustler's University shut down its affiliate marketing program. Paul Harrigan, a marketing professor at the University of Western Australia, said the affiliate programme was a social media pyramid scheme. Tate described the claim that Hustler's University's operated as a pyramid scheme as false.


=== The Real World ===
After Hustler's University shut down, Tate relaunched another version of the product named "The Real World" in October 2022. The name references Tate's idea that the world as normally perceived resembles "the Matrix" to which he offers an alternative.
The Real World primarily targets male teenagers. Former Real World students have described the programme as having a "cult-like atmosphere." The Real World has been described by a lawyer for former members as the male version of the Tate brothers' "digital grooming". Members refer to each other as "G" with Tate being the "Top G". The group is centred on Tate's "41 Tenets for men." The Real World course offering included cryptocurrency, e-commerce, and drop shipping.
In 2023, Google and Apple removed The Real World's associated app, the Real World Portal, from their app stores. In January 2024, analysis from the Center for Countering Digital Hate found The Real World official YouTube channel had received 450 million video views, and according to the researchers, a third party's channel had gained nearly 300 million views reposting The Real World content. The researchers suggested that YouTube had earned up to £2.4m in revenue from advertisements on these two channels, and criticised the company for not banning similar third party channels sooner. YouTube responded by describing the estimate as "wildly inaccurate and overinflated".
In May 2024, the website for The Real World leaked the personal data of 968,447 user accounts due to a misconfigured database. Leaked information included email addresses and account passwords. In addition, 22 million messages sent by users on the platform were also openly accessible. In November, the website suffered a cyberattack which leaked the usernames of 794,000 former and current members, 324,382 registered email addresses, as well as the contents of 221 public and 395 private chat servers.


=== The War Room ===

Advertised by Tate and costing $8,000, The War Room is described as "a global network in which exemplars of individualism work to free the modern man from socially induced incarceration", stating it teaches men "physical, mental, emotional, spiritual, and financial development". A senior member of the group, Miles Sonkin, also known as Iggy Semmelweiss, is the supposed leader of the group according to a BBC investigation. Semmelweiss reportedly met Tate in 2018, with the group established in 2019. The investigation in August 2023 led by Matt Shea documented evidence of women groomed into online sex work by members of the group, described as an all-male secretive society.

The group chat, featuring 12,000 pages of encrypted messages, indicated that the group taught a "Pimpin' Hoes Degree" course, abbreviated to PhD, using techniques to "romantically seduce, emotionally manipulate and socially isolate women before luring them into performing on webcams". A legal expert in human trafficking from Bucharest described the course as using all the practices of the "Lover Boy" strategy. A deleted description of the defunct course on the website that prosecutors in Romania have since used in the case against Tate read:My job was to meet a girl, go on a few dates, sleep with her, test if she's quality, get her to fall in love with me to where she'd do anything I say, and then get her on webcam so we could become rich together,Evidence suggested violence against women was also taught and discussed. Victims said sex was used as a manipulation technique. Members of the group believed they were performing "Pavlovian conditioning" on the women, with submission tests such as receiving tattoos on their bodies of members' initials. A whistleblower, who claimed to be former head of sales and marketing, described the group as a cult he had been "brainwashed" by. As of August 2022, there were 434 members and 45 potential victims, based on the leaked chat logs.


=== Meme coins ===
In 2024 Tate launched a meme coin called DADDY. It soon reached a market capitalisation of $217 million. The name is meant to be a play on Iggy Azalea's meme coin $MOTHER, with Tate saying that the coin was "for the patriarchy" and "We're bringing the Gs back make me a f***ing sandwich females." He has encouraged those who hold the coin to join The Real World and has promoted the coin heavily on his social media.
In October 2024 Andrew Tate was sent a series of questions by the YouTube channel Coffeezilla about his meme coin DADDY. In response Tate doxxed Coffeezilla and encouraged his supporters to email abusive content to Coffeezilla with Tate specifically requesting that they call him "gay".


== Other ventures ==


=== Boxing ===

In August 2025, sports journalist Ariel Helwani broke that news that Tate was in advanced talks with Misfits Boxing to compete in a heavyweight bout by the end of the year. However, a day later BBC Sport contacted DAZN and were informed that Tate was in fact not in negotiations with Misfits despite the earlier reports, Misfits declined to comment. On 15 October Daily Mirror reported that Tate was set to make his face reality star Chase DeMoor for the MFB heavyweight title, with the bout set to take place on 20 December at the Coca-Cola Arena in Dubai, UAE. On 19 October, Misfits formally announced the event with a promotional video that featured a cobra wrapping around a Christmas tree, a subtle nod to Tate's fighting alias. On 30 October, the bout between Tate and DeMoor was announced to headline Misfits Mania – The Fight Before Christmas, accompanied with a promotional video that claimed Tate had replaced KSI as the CEO of Misfits.


== Views ==


=== Manosphere ===
Tate is an influencer in the manosphere and "alpha male" community, described as both right-wing and far-right. According to The Conversation, he is a recognised "thought leader" in the online manosphere who mobilises his supporters to spread his ideas to a broader audience. He otherwise identifies as a libertarian and has been dubbed the "king of toxic masculinity". American conservatives such as Tucker Carlson and Candace Owens have platformed Tate as a proponent of "traditional views on men in the culture war raging over gender".


=== Women ===

Tate has been criticised for saying that women "belong in the home", "can't drive", and are "given to the man and belong to the man" as "a man's property". Tate has also said that men prefer dating 18- and 19-year-old women, because they are "likely to have had sex with fewer men", in order to "make an imprint" on teenagers, and that women who do not stay home are "hoes".


=== Sexual harassment ===
In 2017 Tate received attention for his tweets describing his view of what qualifies as sexual harassment amid the Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse cases, and for tweeting several times that sexual assault victims share responsibility for their assaults. Tate came out in support of Russell Brand after multiple women accused Brand of sexual assault.


=== Far-right ideologies ===

Tate is associated with far-right ideologies and individuals, including the British activist Tommy Robinson. Before 2022, Tate became known among the online far-right through his appearances on InfoWars and acquaintances including Mike Cernovich, Jack Posobiec, and Paul Joseph Watson. He attended the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) in 2019. Hope not Hate accuses Tate of a "long history of racist statements, homophobia and links to the organised far-right". In February 2023, Thierry Baudet, founder and leader of the far-right Forum for Democracy, called Tate an "outspoken political dissident" and "courageous critic", tabling a motion in the Dutch parliament regarding his detention in Romania. The Conversation called Tate "not explicitly far right" but otherwise as a figure who has promoted far-right propaganda, including the great replacement conspiracy theory.
Tate has questioned whether the Nazis were really the "bad guy" in World War II. Tate has performed Nazi salutes, and advocated "bring[ing] the Nazi salute back". In January 2025, after Elon Musk made a salute interpreted by many as a Nazi salute, Tate responded by saying, "we're so back".


=== Life discipline ===
In a June 2023 interview with the BBC, Tate said that he was "acting under the instruction of God to do good things" and that "I preach hard work, discipline. I'm an athlete, I preach anti-drugs, I preach religion, I preach no alcohol, I preach no knife crime."


=== Other views ===
Tate has said that depression "isn't real." Tate stated that conspiracy theorist Alex Jones is a hero. In March 2024, after the collapse of the Francis Scott Key bridge in Maryland, Tate falsely claimed the ship that collided with the bridge "was cyber-attacked". Tate was accused of inciting online hate after becoming one of the first influencers to amplify misinformation about the Southport stabbing, leading to the far-right riots in the UK.
In the context of the Gaza war, Tate has accused Israel of "genociding" Palestinians and said that the October 7 attacks was as "an eye for an eye". In response to the killing of Yahya Sinwar, he stated, "I can only pray for a death as heroic as Yahya Sinwar". Mother Jones reported that Tate also promoted an antisemitic conspiracy saying that "'the Matrix' is really just the Jewish mafia." With respect to Adolf Hitler and Holocaust denial, Tate stated, "stop crying over the Hitler crap" and "if they lied to us about Gaza and Israel … Do you think they lied about [the Second World War]?"


== Reception and influence ==
Beginning in 2022, Tate's views and their influence on teenage boys and young men have become a particular concern of parents, teachers and mental health experts in much of the world, including North America, the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand. The New York Times has described his views as "brainwashing a generation", due to his influence in British schools, and the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) considers Tate's misogyny mainstream. The ADL reported that Tate "teaches his acolytes that women are inferior and morally deficient beings [...] who deserve to be physically, sexually and emotionally abused", equating his philosophy to that of pickup artists.
In August 2022, the White Ribbon Campaign, a nonprofit organisation opposing male-on-female violence, called Tate's commentary "extremely misogynistic" and its possible long-term effects on his young male audience "concerning". Hope not Hate asserted that Tate's social media presence might present a "dangerous slip road into the far-right" for his audience and criticised his ties to the far right. The Rape Crisis England and Wales said it is "unacceptable that such a blatant display of misogyny is being given a platform". The Centre for Countering Digital Hate called Tate's videos "extreme misogyny" after uncovering videos viewed millions of times referencing leaving an imprint on young women. In response to these criticisms, Tate said that his content includes "many videos praising women" and mainly aims to teach his audience to avoid "toxic and low-value people as a whole". He added that he plays a "comedic character" and that people believe "absolutely false narratives" about him.
In February 2023, Tim Squirrell of the Institute for Strategic Dialogue said Tate posed "a risk of radicalising young men into misogynist extremism". In May, Hope not Hate's director of policy called Tate a "legitimising force" for misogynistic views and the End Violence Against Women Coalition's director said it is "hugely concerning" that "Tate continues to wield influence on a significant proportion of younger men, who say they agree with his views on women, masculinity and how to be a man." According to interviews by The Conversation in mid–2023, teachers explicitly identified Tate's influence on students in reference to a dramatic increase in "sexism, misogyny and sexual harassment" in Australian classrooms. In October, UK domestic abuse charity Women's Aid called Tate's content a proxy for misogyny and sexism, saying, "the popularity of Tate is not a phenomenon in and of itself and, instead, is a current representation of existing misogyny".
In a 2024 interview with Empire magazine, the actor James McAvoy said that his character Paddy in the movie Speak No Evil was inspired by Tate.


=== Response ===
In February 2023, courses for teachers in the United Kingdom on how to address Tate's views sold out. Of what was called violent misogyny and other forms of extremist content that Tate distributes online, the head of UK counter-terror policing has said, "I'm concerned about the effect of that kind of rhetoric in the minds of young boys". In April 2023, the Department for Education (DfE) discouraged discussion of Tate, with many citing his influence regarding sexual harassment and misogynistic incidents. The co-founder of the charity Diversify expressed frustration over the refusal to provide any resources or training for teachers.
In October 2023, the Australian government allocated AUD$3.5 million (£1.8 million) to counter "harmful gender stereotypes perpetuated online" in response to young fans of Tate who have been described as "increasingly bringing misogynist views into Australian schools". According to researchers at Monash University Tate and other manosphere influencers have shaped the way boys treat women and girls and led students to openly espouse "male supremacist" views, to the extent that some Australian teachers have quit their jobs.
In February 2024, the shadow education secretary in the UK, Bridget Phillipson, said the Labour Party wanted to use male role models to counter the misogyny of influencers such as Tate. The proposal would implement "peer-to-peer mentoring" programs for school staff in order to directly address the impact of Tate and others. The general secretary of the National Education Union, Daniel Kebede, welcomed the plans, saying, "schools would welcome more support on how to respond to the online sexism and sexual harassment".


=== Surveys ===
In January 2023, a survey by "The Man Cave" of 500 teenage Australian boys found that 28 per cent looked up to Tate and 36 per cent found him relatable. Of 24 schools, half said they were "seeing a significant and negative impact of his influence on our boys". The next month, a survey by Hope not Hate found that eight in ten British males aged 16–17 had viewed Tate's content, with 45 per cent of British males aged 16–24 having a positive view of him, compared to 1 per cent of British females aged 16 and 17.
In September 2023, YouGov data found that 26 per cent of men aged 18–29 and 28 per cent of men aged 30–39 agreed with Tate's views on women. Of the 63 per cent of British adults who had heard of Tate, 6 per cent held a positive view, with men making up 12 per cent and women 3 per cent of views, while about half had a negative view.
In October 2023, a survey by Women's Aid and ORB International found that 40 per cent of 7–18 year-olds had heard of Tate, including 21 per cent of 7–11 year-olds and 43–53 per cent of 11–18 year-olds. The report found a correlation between being exposed to Tate's content and having harmful perceptions of relationships, with children exposed to such content being "five times more likely to think hurting people is OK".
In February 2024, research by King's College London, the Center for Women's Global Leadership, and Ipsos found that one in five men aged 16–29 who had heard of Tate held a favourable view, compared to 7 per cent of women in the same age group. Based on the survey of over 3,700 respondents aged 16 and over, only 6 per cent held a favourable view, while more than three out of four held an unfavourable view. One in seven agreed with his views on male identity and gender roles and 61 per cent disagreed.


=== Social media ===
An early YouTube channel Andrew and Tristan made was called the Hateful Tates. Tate became widely known in mid-2022 and was searched on Google more times than both Donald Trump and COVID-19 that July. In August, The Guardian reported that videos of Tate on TikTok had been viewed 11.6 billion times. In December 2023, Tate had over 8.5 million followers on X (Twitter), an increase of 5 million since December 2022. As of August 2024, Tate has 9.9 million followers on X. He was the third-most googled person in 2023, and his Wikipedia article was ranked among the top 25 English Wikipedia articles in 2023.
In December 2022, Tate addressed the environmentalist Greta Thunberg in a tweet extolling his carbon-emitting automobiles and asked for her email address to give her more information. Thunberg replied with the fake, satirical email address "smalldickenergy@getalife.com". The exchange received substantial attention on Twitter, with Thunberg's retort quickly becoming one of the most-liked tweets ever.

    
    
    

    
    
    

Tate gained notoriety on social media for promoting a "hyper-masculine, ultra-luxurious lifestyle" and a "hyper-macho image". According to The Guardian in February 2023, Tate is popular among British teenage boys, who mimic his phrases and philosophies. It reported that "virtually every parent in Britain" had heard of him, and that parents and schoolteachers expressed concern that he was influencing boys to exhibit misogynistic and aggressive behaviour. In the UK and Australia, increased sexual harassment in schools has been attributed to Tate's influence.
In January 2023 the BBC reported that Tate and his brother had used social media to contact various young women in an attempt to get them to join their webcam business. A year later, the Center for Countering Digital Hate found that YouTube had earned up to £2.4 million in advertising revenue from Tate's content and accused YouTube of being "happy to continue to turn a blind eye". YouTube called the figure "wildly inaccurate and overinflated", highlighting that most channels are not monetised for such revenue.


==== Deplatforming ====
Three of Tate's Twitter accounts have been suspended at different times. In 2021, an account he created to evade his previous ban was verified by Twitter, contrary to its policies. The account was subsequently permanently banned, and Twitter said the verification occurred in error.
In August 2022, after an online campaign to deplatform him, Tate was permanently banned from Facebook and Instagram, losing 4.7 million followers from the latter. Their parent company, Meta, said he had violated its policy on "dangerous organizations and individuals". TikTok, where videos featuring Tate's name as a hashtag have been viewed over 13 billion times, also removed his account after determining that it violated their policies on "content that attacks, threatens, incites violence against, or otherwise dehumanises an individual or a group". Shortly thereafter, YouTube suspended his channel, which had 760,000 subscribers, citing multiple violations, including hate speech and COVID-19 misinformation. Tate later deleted his own Twitch channel, which had 50,000 subscribers. In November 2022, after Elon Musk acquired Twitter, Tate's Twitter account was reinstated.
Tate responded to the bans by saying that, while most of his comments were taken out of context, he took responsibility for how they were received. The YouTuber and boxer Jake Paul denounced Tate's sexism but characterised the bans as censorship. Tate's content continues to circulate on Facebook, Instagram, and TikTok via fan accounts. After the bans, Tate moved to the alt-tech platforms Gettr and Rumble, causing the latter to briefly become the most downloaded app on the Apple App Store.


=== Political party launch ===
In 2025, Tate stated he launched a new political party, the BRUV (Britain Restoring Underlying Values) Party, which was reported to be part of his plan to become prime minister. The party's official website stated, "This is a war to reclaim Britain. No excuses, no compromises, no second chances. We will defend our borders, crush crime, purge corruption, and restore pride to a nation under siege."
The party launch was widely ridiculed on social media, with one Twitter user describing its manifesto as a "mix of North Korea and homoeroticism" while another described the party as the "very worst idea in the history of British politics". Some speculated that it was only a PR stunt, but Tate dismissed the claims, stating, "I am 100% serious. I am in the next election".
The Twitter handle for the political party was suspended. However, after Tate made a complaint to Elon Musk, the account was restored.


== Personal life ==
In 2017 Tate and his brother moved from the United Kingdom to Romania, where they run multiple businesses. Tate said that he moved because he liked "living in countries where corruption is accessible for everybody" and believed he would be less likely to face rape charges in Romania. He said that Romanian police ask women reporting rapes for "evidence" or "CCTV proof", whereas in the Western world during the #MeToo movement any woman "at any point in the future can destroy your life". Tate reportedly has a number of children living in Romania whom he occasionally visits.
Tate was raised Christian but later became an atheist. By early 2022, he identified as a Christian again, and said that he tithed £16,000 to the Romanian Orthodox Church monthly. After a video of him praying at a mosque in Dubai went viral in October 2022, he announced on his Gettr account that he had converted to Islam. Scholars of the faith, such as Mufti Menk, have publicly commended his decision, with Menk stating in a recorded interview that Tate "seems like a very sincere brother" in response to it.
In March 2023, while incarcerated in Romania, Tate's legal team said that "he has a dark spot on his lung, most likely a tumor" following a medical consultation in Dubai, sparking online rumours about whether he has lung cancer. Tate later denied on Twitter that he had cancer.
In June 2025, it was revealed that Tate had received citizenship of Vanuatu through the country's citizenship by investment scheme in December 2022. A spokesperson for Vanuatu's government later stated that they were "definitely looking into" revoking Tate's citizenship.


== Criminal investigations and civil cases ==


=== 2010s ===
Tate was first arrested in Britain in July 2015 after two women filed complaints accusing him of rape and assault and was again arrested on suspicion of rape in December 2015. In 2019, the Crown Prosecution Service declined to file charges for any of the allegations.


==== 2018 ====
Canadian alt-right YouTuber and political activist Lauren Southern wrote in her 2025 memoir that she had met Tate in Romania in 2018. She said in the book that, after he had taken her from a nightclub to her hotel room, "He kissed me. I wasn't expecting it, and I wasn't looking for it, but I kissed him back briefly and then told him I wanted to sleep." She said that, after he insisted in touching her and she tried to fight back, he "put his arm around my neck and began strangling me unconscious. I tried to fight back…. I'd prefer not to share the rest. It's pretty obvious."


=== 2020s ===


==== 2022 ====

In April 2022, the US embassy received a report that an American citizen was being held against her will in a property the Tate brothers own in Pipera, Romania. Romanian police raided the home and a nearby webcam studio belonging to the Tates, where they discovered four women. Two of them, the American and another Romanian woman, told the police they were being held against their will, sparking an in-rem investigation into human trafficking and rape by DIICOT, the Romanian anti-organised crime agency. Later in December, police arrested the Tates and two women. All four were suspected of human trafficking and forming an organised crime group, and one of them is suspected of rape. Romanian authorities seized 29 assets, including cars, properties, watches, and money, totalling almost US$4 million.


==== 2023 ====
In June 2023, DIICOT adjusted the charges from human trafficking to "human trafficking in continued form", a more serious charge, with seven victims identified. The four accused were indicted on charges of rape, human trafficking, and forming an organised crime group to sexually exploit women. They continue to deny all charges and remain under investigation for money laundering and trafficking of minors. That same month, the Tate brothers filed a defamation lawsuit against one of the accusers, their parents and two other people, in Palm Beach County, Florida, United States, seeking $5 million in damages. The Tates claim the five conspired to falsely accuse them of human trafficking and rape, costing them their freedom as well as income from social media and business ventures.


==== 2024 ====
In January 2024, the Romanian criminal case was heard in the preliminary chamber before a trial date was set, and three months later, the Bucharest Tribunal decided that the case against Tate "met the legal criteria". That same month, US District Judge Robin L. Rosenberg dismissed another of the brothers' defamation lawsuits. They had sued a former United States Marine Corps sergeant who reported Tate to the US Embassy in Romania and military officials, leading to his arrest by Romanian authorities.
In March 2024, Westminster Magistrates' Court issued a European arrest warrant against Andrew and Tristan Tate. According to Tate's representative, the charges are based on allegations of sexual aggression from 2012 to 2015. The Tate brothers "categorically reject all charges". In July, Devon and Cornwall Police began civil proceedings against Tate, Tristan, and a third person, for tax evasion with their online businesses. Two months later, the three women involved in the British investigation, along with a fourth British woman, brought a civil case against Tate.
In August 2024, Romanian police expanded their investigation against Tate to include trafficking minors, sex with a minor, money laundering and attempting to influence witnesses. Prosecutors said the new investigation involves 35 alleged victims, including a woman who was a minor at the time. The Tate brothers, among the six detained the next day, denied all the allegations.
In December 2024, the Westminster Magistrates' Court ruled in favour of the Devon and Cornwall Police, allowing them to seize £2.8 million worth of unpaid taxes from the Tate brothers' online businesses.


==== 2025 ====
In February 2025, Alison Hernandez, the Police and Crime Commissioner for Devon and Cornwall in the UK, announced that the force had received around £1.2 million and she hoped that the funds would be used to support the victims of violence against women and girls. In the US, following pressure from the Trump administration on Romanian authorities to lift travel restrictions, Tate left Romania by private jet for the United States and arrived in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, where he had become the subject of a statewide criminal investigation.
In March 2025, Florida's Attorney General, James Uthmeier, initiated a criminal investigation into the affairs of Tate upon his arrival in the state. Tate's ex-girlfriend, Brianna Stern, has accused him of choking and beating her at The Beverly Hills Hotel on 10 March, and Stern claims she was later diagnosed with post-concussion syndrome. She subsequently filed a lawsuit against Tate accusing him of physical and sexual abuse. Tate has denied her accusations.
In May 2025, the UK Crown Prosecution Service brought 21 charges against Tate and his brother Tristan including for rape, actual bodily harm and human trafficking.


== Kickboxing record ==


== Mixed martial arts record ==


=== Professional record ===


=== Amateur record ===


== MF–Professional boxing record ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website
Andrew Tate at BoxRec (registration required)
Andrew Tate at Sherdog
Andrew Tate at IMDb