Arc'teryx is a Canadian apparel company specializing in outdoor apparel and equipment headquartered in North Vancouver, British Columbia. It focuses on technical apparel for mountaineering and Alpine sports, including related accessories. The company's name and logo was created by Jeremy Guard. Arc'teryx is known for its waterproof Gore-Tex shell jackets, knitwear, and down parkas.  Arc'teryx's parent company is Amer Sports, a Finnish sporting goods multinational, which is now owned by Chinese retailer Anta Sports and its co-investors after a 2019 acquisition. Amer Sports, which also owns brands like Salomon and Wilson, then became a public company listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 2024.  
Founded in 1989 as Rock Solid, the company re-branded in 1991 as Arc'teryx and began producing outerwear and climbing gear for the Coast Mountains in Canada. The company was sold to Salomon Group in 2001 and Amer Sports in 2005. 
The company is a major influence in the "gorpcore" and "normcore" fashion movements, the wearing of minimalist, technical apparel in urban settings. The brand is colloquially known as "dead bird".
Due to its recent Rising Dragon firework in Tibet, the brand is facing widespread boycott in China for going against its stated environmental ethos.


== History ==

Originally named "Rock Solid" by co-founder Dave Lane, the company's first line of products was climbing gear. Dave Lane sold a 50% interest in Rock Solid to Jeremy Guard, who changed the company name to Arc'teryx in 1991. The name and logo reference the Archaeopteryx, the transitional fossil of early dinosaurs to modern dinosaurs (birds). Guard chose the name to represent the idea of accelerating evolution as characterized by the geologic time scale of fossils. Guard was president and principal of the company from 1991 to 2001. Using a heat laminate (thermolamination) technology, the partners designed and marketed the Vapor harness, which would become the company's most popular item. In 1993, after a series of relocations and staff additions, Arc'teryx released the Bora backpack using the same Vapor technology. In 1996, the company introduced technical apparel featuring Gore-Tex after obtaining licenses from W. L. Gore & Associates. Arc'teryx re-located its headquarters to Burnaby, British Columbia in 1999 and then to North Vancouver in 2005.
In 2001, Arc'teryx was purchased by Salomon Group, a French subsidiary of the German retailer Adidas. In 2005, Arc'teryx was sold to Finnish retailer Amer Sports. In 2019, Chinese retailer Anta Sports bought a controlling stake (56%) in Amer. As their apparel line expanded Arc'teryx began manufacturing in international markets, specifically in China, the Philippines, Vietnam, Bangladesh, El Salvador, Laos, and Greece. Since the early 2020s, Arc'teryx has co-produced collections with high-fashion brands and designers which expanded their consumer market beyond outdoor enthusiasts.


== Divisions ==
Their garments, accessories, and apparel are organized into various product families and collections, all aimed at different aspects of mountain activities, with two exceptions:

Veilance: their luxury formal streetwear line was founded in 2009, branded as Arc'teryx Veilance.
LEAF: their Law Enforcement and Armed Forces (LEAF) line is aimed at the military and police market.


== The Rising Dragon controversy ==

Arc'teryx partnered with artist Cai Guo-Qiang to launch The Rising Dragon, a fireworks display, as part of a marketing campaign. On September 19, 2025, The Rising Dragon received significant public backlash due to potential environmental harm. Fireworks emitted colored smoke on a plateau in Shigatse in the Tibet Autonomous Region, which is one of the most fragile ecosystems in the world. The performance was staged at an elevation approximately 18,000 feet above sea level. 
Although organizers claimed that described the show used "used biodegradable, environmentally friendly materials" and that all stock herds had been relocated, no environmental assessment was completed prior to the event. Arc'teryx issued a public apology and stated that it would work with an external agency to assess the project's impact. Neither Arc’teryx nor Cai's studio has cleaned up since their firework, contrary to their issued statements. The burden of the job has since fallen on the shoulders of the local community. As a result of the controversy, "four Chinese officials have been dismissed" from their jobs, with the BBC citing them as "Gyantse county's Communist Party secretary, public security chief and two senior members of county and city-level environmental agencies."


== Subculture ==
Arc'teryx is seen as a high-end status symbol among youth, "just shy of Stone Island and Moncler."  The Financial Times noted one of their largest demographics as "urbanites" in 2022. Labeled a cult brand by Fast Company in 2021, Arc'teryx is worn by "[both] hikers and hype-beasts" according to The New York Times.  
The company is a major influence in the "gorpcore" and "normcore" fashion movements – the wearing of minimalist, outdoor apparel in urban settings, along with Mammut, REI, Marmot and Patagonia. Throughout 2022, a TikTok trend emerged where individuals would shower, fully clothed with an Arc'teryx jacket, as British rapper YT's song "Arc'teryx" played in the background. Arc'teryx is a staple of Generation Z and zillennial fashion, particularly in the U.S. and Canada. Luxury fashion houses that have minimalist aesthetics collaborate with Arc'teryx to produce capsule collections, according to The New York Times and GQ. 


== See also ==
Moncler, Stone Island, and Canada Goose
Streetwear and minimalist fashion
List of outdoor industry parent companies
Coast Mountains and Canadian Arctic tundra


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website