Asian Hispanic and Latino Americans, also called Asian Hispanics or Asian Latinos, are Americans of Asian ancestry and ancestry from Latin America. It also refers to Asians from Latin America that speak Spanish or Portuguese natively and immigrated to the United States. This includes Hispanic and Latino Americans who identify themselves (or were officially classified by the United States Census Bureau, Office of Management and Budget and other U.S. government agencies) as Asian Americans.
Hispanidad, which is independent of race, is the only ethnic category, as opposed to racial category, which is officially unified by the US Census Bureau. The distinction made by government agencies for those within the population of any official race category, including "Asian American", is between those who report Hispanic and Latino ethnic backgrounds and all others who do not. In the case of Asian Americans, these two groups are respectively termed Asian Hispanic and Latinos and non-Hispanic or Latino Asian Americans, the former being those who say Asian ancestry from Spain or Latin America and the latter consisting of an ethnically diverse collection of all others who are classified as Asian Americans that do not report Spanish or Latin American ethnic backgrounds.


== Population ==
In the 2000 US Census, 119,829 Hispanic and Latino Americans identified as being of Asian race alone. In 2006, the Census Bureau's American Community Survey estimated them at 154,694, while its Population Estimates, which are official, put them at 277,704. In the 2010 Census, there were 598,146 Asian Hispanic and Latino Americans, including those who are multiracial in origin.
Due to an 1849 decree, Filipino Americans often have Spanish surnames from the Alphabetical Catalog of Surnames. The Philippines was once the destination of immigration from Latin America to Asia back in the era of the Manila-Acapulco Galleons. Nevertheless, the vast majority of Filipino Americans, who number over two million, are counted as non-Hispanic; Hispanic Asians are typically limited to immigrants of Asian descent from Latin America, such as for example Chinese Cubans or Japanese Peruvians, and their children, as well as mixed-race individuals with one Hispanic and one Asian parent.


== Notable people ==
Miguel del Aguila, American composer
Jhené Aiko, singer
Tatyana Ali, American actress and R&B singer
Daniella Alonso, American actress
Fred Armisen, American actor and comedian
Tyson Beckford, American male model and actor
Steve Caballero, pro skateboarder
Franklin Chang-Díaz, former NASA astronaut
Sonia Chang-Díaz, politician
Alex Cabrera Suzuki, Venezuelan professional baseball player
Chris Cheng, professional marksman
Arthur Chin, United States Air Force pilot
Sebastian Castro, actor, singer, visual artist and YouTube sensation
Nikita Dragun, YouTuber, makeup artist, beauty influencer, TikToker
Carlos Galvan, singer
Mila J, singer, rapper and dancer
Kelis, singer
Kim Samuel, singer
Lee Yoo-jin, South Korean actress of Korean and Latino-American descent
Wallace Loh, President of the University of Maryland
Kamala Lopez, American actress
Chino Moreno, frontman of Deftones
Asia Nitollano, singer
Sigrid Nunez, writer
Karen Olivo, Tony Award-winning actress
Jae Park, musician, singer
Kyoung H. Park, playwright
Elmelindo Rodrigues Smith, Medal of Honor recipient
Chino Rodriguez, Latin music record executive
Tao Rodríguez-Seeger, musician
Jessica Sanchez, singer
Harry Shum Jr., actor
Tony Succar, percussionist, composer, and producer
Jasmine Villegas, singer
Cassie Ventura, singer, model and actress


== See also ==

Asian Americans
Punjabi Mexican Americans
Latino
List of Latino Americans
White Latino Americans
Black Latino Americans


== References ==


== External links ==
PBS: A CULTURAL IDENTITY An essay on the meaning of the Hispanic label. By Richard Rodriguez.