Rebbeca Marie Gomez (born March 2, 1997), known professionally as Becky G, is an American singer and actress. Born and raised in Inglewood, California, she first gained recognition in 2011 for her cover versions of popular songs, many of which she uploaded to YouTube. One of her videos caught the attention of record producer Dr. Luke, who signed her to a recording contract with his label Kemosabe Records, an imprint of RCA Records. Shortly afterward, Gomez worked with singers will.i.am, Cody Simpson and Cher Lloyd.
Her 2013 debut commercial single, "Becky from the Block", was released to positive reception despite failing to chart. Its 2014 follow-up, "Can't Get Enough" (featuring Pitbull) moderately entered the US Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart and served as lead single for her debut extended play (EP), Play It Again (2013). In April of that year, Gomez achieved mainstream success with the release of her single "Shower", which peaked within the top 20 of the Billboard Hot 100 and received double platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). She embarked on a co-headlining tour with J Balvin during September and October 2015, which spanned throughout the United States. She portrayed Valentina Galindo in two episodes of the musical television series Empire, while contributing two songs to the show's soundtrack. Her 2016 single and first Spanish-language song, "Sola", led her to continue releasing songs in the language until her 2018 promotional single, "Zooted" (featuring French Montana and Farruko). Afterward, she released several singles in both languages.
Gomez's studio albums, each recorded in Spanish, have all peaked within the top ten of the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart. Her debut studio album, Mala Santa (2019), entered the Billboard 200, received septuple platinum certification by RIAA Latin, and spawned the singles "Mayores" and "Sin Pijama". Her second album, Esquemas (2022), debuted atop the Billboard Latin Pop Albums chart, while its third single, "Mamiii" (with Karol G), peaked at number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 and remains her highest-charting song. Her third album, Esquinas (2023), debuted at number three on the Regional Mexican Albums chart and spawned the single "Por el Contrario", which became her first number-one song on the Regional Mexican Airplay chart. Her fourth album, Encuentros (2024), debuted at numbers fifteen and nine on the US Top Latin Albums and Regional Mexican Albums charts, respectively.
Gomez has received numerous accolades, including two American Music Awards, an iHeartRadio Music Award, nine Latin American Music Awards, including the honorable Extraordinary Evolution Award, and the Impact Award at the 2023 Billboard Women in Music ceremony. She has also been nominated for a Billboard Music Award and five Latin Grammy Awards. Gomez launched a cosmetics company, Treslúce Beauty, in 2021.


== Life and career ==


=== 1997–2011: Early life and career beginnings ===
Rebbeca Marie Gomez was born on March 2, 1997, in Inglewood, California, the oldest of four children, to American parents of Mexican descent, Francisco "Frank" Gómez and Alejandra "Alex" Gomez (née Esquivias). All four of her grandparents are from Jalisco, Mexico, while her parents and most of her family were born in the United States. Gomez has two brothers and a younger sister. In December 2017, she revealed she has a half-sister from her father's side. Gomez grew up in Moreno Valley, and at the age of nine her family lost their home and moved into the converted garage of her grandparents' house due to financial problems. Gomez began working part-time jobs to help support her family, doing commercials and voice over work. She had what she described as a "mid-life crisis" when she was nine years old, and decided she wanted to pursue a music career. She was quoted as stating:That was literally my mid-life crisis when I was nine years old. That's when I felt like, 'OK, I gotta get my life together. What am I gonna do?' I pushed that on myself at a younger age than the average kid because at the time my family had lost our home. I've always been more mature for my age, so I was already understanding what they were going through. And I just thought, 'How can I help them?' She initially attended public school, though had to undergo home schooling due to issues with bullying. She claimed that at one point she was jumped by multiple girls while in the restroom, and was a frequent target due to her jobs in the entertainment industry.
Gomez appeared in the short film El Tux (2008) as Claudia Gómez and as Nina in the Discovery Channel television film La estación de la Calle Olvera (2008). She became a member of a girl group named G.L.A.M. in 2009, and later joined B.C.G., a duo with G.L.A.M. member Cristal G.  She filmed a music video as part of G.L.A.M. for a song titled "JellyBean" in 2009. During this time, Gomez also began recording herself singing and rapping songs using GarageBand, and created a YouTube account to post covers of popular songs online. She also began writing her own songs, and by the age of thirteen had taught herself how to play guitar. Gomez befriended production duo The Jam when she was thirteen, who liked Gomez's written work. The trio began working on material together, resulting in the covers of six songs: "Otis", uploaded to YouTube on September 15, 2011, "Lighters", released on October 13, "Novacane", released on October 27, "Take Care", uploaded on March 1, 2012, "Boyfriend", released on March 30, and the song "Turn the Music Up", a sample of "Mi Tierra", uploaded on July 18. These songs were meant to be part of a mixtape, titled @itsbeckygomez, though this project never came to fruition. Her cover of "Otis" caught the attention of producer Dr. Luke, who had worked with artists including Britney Spears and Miley Cyrus, among others. Luke scheduled a meeting with Gomez, and asked her to play guitar for him; he later signed her to his Kemosabe Records record label, through RCA Records. In reference to her video clip for "Otis", Luke claimed "I would have signed her off that video alone. I was 100 percent in. She has so much personality and her voice just pops out of the speakers. Then I met her and discovered she could also sing and play the guitar and I thought, 'This is even better.' Then I found out she could write and it was like, 'What else are you going to tell me, that you're also Van Gogh?' Her potential is limitless." Shortly after signing with the label, Gomez began work on her debut album.


=== 2012–2015: Commercial success with music and acting ===

On September 6, 2012, while working on her debut album, Gomez released her debut single "Problem" featuring American rapper will.i.am. A remix version of the song, subtitled "(The Monster Remix)" was released August 31, for the animated film Hotel Transylvania; the song served as a promotional single and also appeared in the movie's end credits. Gomez and will.i.am filmed a music video for the remix; it features both artists in a hotel while scenes from the movie also appear. On August 7, Gomez featured on Australian singer Cody Simpson's single, "Wish U Were Here". On October 2, she was featured on English singer Cher Lloyd's single, "Oath". The song was originally written by Gomez, but was brought to Lloyd. The single had some commercial success, becoming Gomez's first entry in the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number fifty-eight in the Canadian Hot 100, and was certified gold by the RIAA. Gomez also featured with Brazilian singer Michel Teló on a remix of his cover of the song "Ai Se Eu Te Pego", released on his UK EP on October 14. She later collaborated with American singer and rappers Kesha, Juicy J and Wiz Khalifa, in a remix of Kesha's "Die Young", which was included on the Japanese deluxe edition of her second studio album, Warrior.
On April 8, 2013, Gomez released "Becky from the Block", as her official debut single. The song is a cover of American singer Jennifer Lopez's 2003 single "Jenny from the Block". Gomez filmed a music video in her neighborhood, with Lopez herself making a cameo in the clip. Entertainment Tonight described the version to have "give[n] Jenny's NY-based tune a West Coast slant". On May 6, Gomez released the promotional single "Play It Again", alongside a music video, also filmed in and around her neighborhood. Her debut EP, also titled Play It Again, was released on July 13, 2013. A Spanglish version of the track, subtitled "(Una Y Otra Vez)" was released on August 9, with the chorus and bridge now sung in Spanish. Gomez performed this version at the 2013 Premios Juventud ceremony, where she was nominated for Mejor Revelación (Best Revelation). On September 17, she released the song "Quiero Bailar (All Through the Night)" with Mexican DJ trio 3Ball MTY, which sees Gomez rapping and singing in both English and Spanish. In October, she confirmed that she was already recording her debut album. On November 6, she released a music video for the second promotional single "Built For This". "Can't Get Enough" featuring American rapper Pitbull was released as the EP's lead single on March 29, 2014. The song debuted at number ten on the U.S. Billboard Hot Latin Songs, and debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard Latin Airplay. A Spanish version of "Can't Get Enough" was released to digital platforms on May 1. On April 23, Gomez released the standalone single "Shower". The song was a commercial success, peaked at number sixteen in the U.S., peaking at number thirty-eight in Canada, and peaked at number eighty in the U.K., and was certified 2× platinum by the RIAA. On November 4, Gomez released the single "Can't Stop Dancin'". The song peaked at number 88 in the U.S. She released a remix with Colombian singer J Balvin in March 2015. Gomez opened for American singers Demi Lovato and Katy Perry on select dates of their Demi and Prismatic world tours (2014–15) in both the United States and Mexico. Billboard featured Gomez on their 21 Under 21 list in 2014, 2015, and 2017.

Gomez featured on Mexican singer Thalía's single, "Como Tú No Hay Dos", released on January 7, 2015. On April 1, Gomez released the single "Lovin' So Hard", along with a music video consisting of homemade footage of her and American singer Austin Mahone, whom she briefly dated. On June 26, Gomez debuted a song titled "We Are Mexico" in solidarity with the Latin community, in response to Donald Trump's remarks against illegal Mexican immigrants. She also performed at a tribute concert for the late Mexican-American singer Jenni Rivera. Gomez appeared as Valentina Galindo in two episodes of Empire, performing the singles "Do It" and "New, New" for the show's soundtrack. On August 21, she released single "Break a Sweat". Gomez embarked on a co-headlining tour with J Balvin beginning on September 23 and ending on October 25; the tour spanned across the United States. In 2015, Rolling Stone included her on their list of "18 Teens Shaking Up Pop Culture". She later collaborated with Dutch DJs Yellow Claw on the songs "Wild Mustang" and "For the Thrill", from their album Blood For Mercy. Gomez was cast as Trini in the film Power Rangers (2017).


=== 2016–2018: Crossover to Latin music and films ===

Gomez traveled to Vancouver, Canada, to film Power Rangers. Filming occurred from February 29 to May 28, 2016. She collaborated with Pitbull in a song titled "Superstar". The song served as the official anthem for the Copa América Centenario. Gomez decided to move to Spanish music in 2016, changing the course in her music career to the Latin music market. On June 24, Gomez released the standalone single "Sola". The song serves as her first to be sung solely in Spanish and was planned to be the lead single from her then-upcoming Spanish debut album. The single peaked at number eighteen on the Hot Latin Songs chart. On July 22, she was featured alongside Puerto Rican singer Yandel on American rapper Lil Jon's single, "Take It Off", released alongside its music video; a Spanglish version was released the same day. The single peaked at number 45 on the Hot Latin Songs chart. On October 7, Gomez released the follow-up single to "Sola", "Mangú", after its premiere at the Latin American Music Awards, where she won the Favorite Pop/Rock Female Artist category at the ceremony. The single peaked at number 47 on the Hot Latin Songs chart.
Gomez was featured on American producers Play-N-Skillz's both Spanglish and English cover versions of the 1994 song "Si Una Vez " by late Tejano singer Selena, alongside Mexican-American singer Frankie J and American rapper Kap G. The singles were released on February 24 and April 7, 2017, respectively. On March 3, Gomez released the single "Todo Cambió". It peaked at number 33 on the Hot Latin Songs chart. On March 24, Power Rangers was released, marking Gomez's feature film debut. She received public attention after it was revealed that her character, Trini, is queer, being the first film superhero to be from the LGBT community. She collaborated with Argentine singer Axel, on the single "Que Nos Animemos", which was released on June 30, as part of his album Ser. On September 8, Gomez was featured on the song "Todo Lo Que Quiero" from Yandel's fourth solo studio album #Update. On September 21, it was confirmed that Gomez would be the opening act for American girl group Fifth Harmony, for the Latin American leg of their PSA Tour, with shows in Argentina, Chile, and Mexico. During the group's performance in Argentina, Gomez was pulled off the stage by security after being confused for a fan when attempting to cover member Dinah Jane with the country's flag when her outfit was ripping apart. Gomez joined Dominican-American singer and long-time friend Leslie Grace on the song "Díganle", released on September 28, which was remixed a year later with vocals from Latin boy band CNCO. The single peaked at number 36 on the Hot Latin Songs chart. Gomez also collaborated with American violinist Lindsey Stirling as the featured vocalist on the track "Christmas C'mon", from Stirling's Christmas album, Warmer in the Winter, released on October 20. On October 26, she hosted along with Mexican actor Diego Boneta the Latin American Music Awards in Los Angeles, California.

On February 9, 2018, Venezuelan duo Mau y Ricky released a remix of their song "Mi Mala" with Colombian singer Karol G featuring Gomez, Grace and Argentine singer Lali. The single peaked at number 38 in the Hot Latin Songs. On the 16th of the same month, Jamaican singer and rapper Sean Paul and French DJ David Guetta released the single "Mad Love" also featuring Gomez, which was co-written by Colombian singer-songwriter Shakira and included on the extended play Mad Love the Prequel. The single peaked at number 71 in Canada, and peaked at number 22 in U.K. On March 16, Spanish singer Ana Mena released the single "Ya Es Hora" with Gomez and American singer De La Ghetto. The single peaked at number 29 in Spain. On April 27, Gomez was featured in a remix of "Dura" by Puerto Rican rapper Daddy Yankee, alongside Puerto Rican rapper Bad Bunny and Dominican singer Natti Natasha. They premiered the song as a surprise performance at the Billboard Latin Music Awards. On June 15, Mau y Ricky released the song "Mal de la Cabeza" with Gomez, as a track from their album Para Aventuras y Curiosidades; its title derives from the first line in the song. Gomez returned to the English-speaking market after three years with the release of "Zooted" featuring Moroccan-American rapper French Montana and Puerto Rican rapper Farruko, which was made available for download on July 20. In August, Gomez starred in the sci-fi adventure film A.X.L., which was filmed in late 2017; the movie received negative reviews from critics and, like Power Rangers, was a box-office disappointment. Gomez starred in the lead role in the animated fantasy film Gnome Alone, alongside Josh Peck; it was originally slated for release in theaters, but was only released in Latin America, Europe and Asia in April 2018. It was made available in Netflix in October of the same year. Gomez was honored by The Latin Recording Academy as one of the Leading Ladies of Entertainment. On October 19, Mexican singer Joss Favela released the single "Pienso en Ti" with Gomez, which features Regional Mexican, her first song in the genre. Later that month, Spanish singer C. Tangana released the single "Booty" with Gomez. The song was certified 4× platinum by the RIAA. Its music video was nominated for Best Music Video at the Premios Odeón. On October 25, 2018, Gomez, Mexican singer Gloria Trevi, Grace, Puerto Rican actress Roselyn Sánchez and Mexican actress Aracely Arámbula hosted the Latin American Music Awards in Los Angeles, California. Gomez won the Favorite Female Artist of the Year at the ceremony. Gomez featured in "Lost in the Middle of Nowhere" from American singer Kane Brown's second album, Experiment. Kane Brown released a Spanish version of "Lost in the Middle of Nowhere" with Gomez, along with a music video, and a behind-the-scenes clip with the English version, in March 2019. She featured on Puerto Rican producers DJ Luian and Mambo Kingz's single "Bubalú" featuring Puerto Rican rapper Anuel AA and American singer Prince Royce, released on November 6. The song peaked at number twenty-two in the Hot Latin Songs, and was certified 21× platinum by the RIAA. On December 21, Gomez was featured in a remix of "Mala Mía" by Colombian singer Maluma, alongside Brazilian singer Anitta.


=== 2019–2020: Mala Santa ===
On January 18, 2019, Gomez officially made her return to English music with the release of "LBD", along with its lyric video. On March 1, Gomez performed a series of shows in Chile, starting with a headlining set at the Viña del Mar International Song Festival festival in Viña del Mar, during the festival Gomez was the recipient of two awards Silver Seagull and Golden Seagull. On March 22, she released single "Green Light Go". Gomez embarked on her self-titled tour, visiting Spanish-speaking countries. Gomez featured on Anitta's single "Banana", released on April 5. On April 19, Gomez released the standalone single "La Respuesta" with Maluma. The single peaked at number thirteen in the Hot Latin Songs. The song was nominated for the Favorite Video at the 2019 Latin American Music Awards. On April 26, Gomez released the single "Next to You" with British DJ Digital Farm Animals and Jamaican producer Rvssian, which was remixed featuring Nigerian-American singer Davido, released on May 24. "Un Mundo Ideal", a bilingual version of "A Whole New World", was performed by English singer Zayn Malik and Gomez for the soundtrack to the 2019 remake of Aladdin. The song was released on May 17, 2019. On June 28, Colombian group ChocQuibTown released the single "Que Me Baile" with Gomez. On July 12, Puerto Rican rapper Guaynaa released a remix of his song "Rebota" with American singer Nicky Jam and Farruko featuring Gomez and Panamanian singer Sech. The song peaked at number twenty-eight in the Hot Latin Songs, and was certified platinum by the RIAA. On September 6, Senegalese-American singer Akon released "Cómo No" featuring Gomez, as the lead single from his album El Negreeto. On September 13, Gomez released the standalone single "Secrets". On September 20, American rapper Saweetie released "My Type (Latin Remix)" featuring Gomez and Dominican rapper Meliii. On September 27, she featured on South Korean rapper J-Hope's song "Chicken Noodle Soup". The song contains lyrics in Spanish, English, and Korean, written by both in their respective languages. The music video for the song featured 50 dancers of different nationalities. The single peaked at number eighty-one in the U.S., peaking at number fifty-five in Canada, and peaked at number eighty-two in U.K. That same day, she appeared on Pitbull's eleventh studio album Libertad 548, on the track "Mala". Pitbull released the remix to "Mala", with Gomez and additional guest vocals from De La Ghetto, released on July 17, 2020.
Gomez released her debut studio album, Mala Santa, in October 2019, and calling it a "new era". It is primarily a reggaeton and pop rock record, incorporating elements of urbano and latin pop. The album debuted at number eighty-five on the US Billboard 200, and debuted in the top five of the Billboard Top Latin Albums, with first-week sales of 8,000 album units, and was certified 7× platinum by the RIAA (Latin). The album's commercial success lead single "Mayores" with Puerto Rican rapper Bad Bunny, the song was released alongside a music video featuring American actor Casper Smart. Gomez stated that "Mayores" would mark the beginning of a "new era". The music video became the most-viewed music video published in 2017 on YouTube, with over 2 billion views. It reached the top-ten in a variety of charts in South America, top-five in Spain, and reached top-five on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart, and also peaked at number 74 in the US, and was certified 46× Platinum by the RIAA (Latin). At the 2018 Latin American Music Awards the song was nominated for Song of the Year, and won Favorite Urban Song, and was nominated for the Top Latin Song at the 2018 Billboard Music Awards. The second commercial success single "Sin Pijama" with Dominican singer Natti Natasha, reaching the top five on the Hot Latin Songs, peaking at number seventy in the US, and was certified 38× platinum by the RIAA (Latin). The music video became the most-viewed music video published in 2018 on YouTube, with over 2 billion views. The video includes a cameo appearance by American singer Prince Royce. The music video surpassed American singers Ariana Grande and Nicki Minaj single "Side to Side" (2016) as the most-viewed female collaboration and became the first to achieve 2 billion views. The song won for the Urban Song of the Year and Urban Collaboration of the Year at the Lo Nuestro Awards. The third single "Cuando Te Besé" with Argentine rapper Paulo Londra. The single peaked at number thirty in the Hot Latin Songs, and became her first number-one song in the Billboard Argentina Hot 100, and was certified 2× platinum by the RIAA (Latin). Mala Santa also produced two other singles; "Dollar" with Puerto Rican rapper Myke Towers, and "Mala Santa". The record includes new collaborations with Sech, Puerto Rican rapper Darell, Mau y Ricky, American singer Dalex, Puerto Rican duo Zion & Lennox and Farruko; each track had visuals which were released on YouTube on the same day of the album, except the previously released singles. She performed "Dollar" with Towers at the Latin American Music Awards the same day, and later performed a medley of "Mayores", "Sin Pijama" and "Mala Santa", after which Gomez was awarded the Extraordinary Evolution Award for her evolving work in a short span of years, and won the Favorite Female Artist. On November 3, she hosted in the MTV Europe Music Awards in Seville, Andalusia, Spain. On November 10, Gomez was part of the song "Giants", as Qiyana, by virtual hip-hop group True Damage in League of Legends for the 2019 World Championship. On the same day, she was part of its live performance for the opening ceremony of the finals.

On January 31, 2020, Mexican pop singer Carlos Rivera released the single "Perdiendo la Cabeza" with Gomez and Puerto Rican singer Pedro Capó. The song became her first number-one song in Mexico, and was certified platinum by the RIAA. On March 20, Gomez was featured in a remix of "Boys Ain't Shit" by Australian singer Saygrace. On April 13, Gomez released the standalone single "They Ain't Ready". On April 23, Cuban duo Gente de Zona released the single "Muchacha" with Gomez. The single was certified platinum by the RIAA. The single was nominated for the Best Urban Song at the 21st Annual Latin Grammy Awards. On May 28, Mexican-American singer Chiquis and Gomez released the single "Jolene" a cumbia style Spanish-language cover of American singer Dolly Parton's song. On June 19, Gomez was featured on the song "Duro Hard" from American hip-hop group Black Eyed Peas Latin album Translation. On June 19, Spanish singer Abraham Mateo released the single "Tiempo Pa Olvidar" with Gomez. On July 10, Gomez released the standalone single "My Man", and its video-game inspired music video features her and boyfriend Sebastian Lletget. On September 3, Juhn released the single "Otro Día Lluvioso" with Puerto Rican singer Lenny Tavárez and Gomez featuring Dalex. During the lockdown, Gomez proved that her talent extends far beyond the stage and screen. She hosted and produced her En La Sala podcast from her living room, discussing various topics with high-profile guests like Vice President-elect Kamala Harris and Colombian reggaetón star J Balvin. Each episode was backed by a charitable endeavor, with Gomez donating $10K to a charity of her choice following every broadcast. On October 9, she was featured in a remix of "Latina" by Colombian singers Reykon and Maluma, alongside American rapper Tyga. On October 29, Gomez released the standalone single "No Drama" with Puerto Rican singer Ozuna. The single peaked at number twenty-three in the Hot Latin Songs. On November 22, she won the Favorite Female Latin Artist at the 2020 American Music Awards. On December 10, she was featured in a remix of "Qué Maldición" by Mexican group Banda MS and American rapper Snoop Dogg. On December 18, she was featured in a remix of "La Curiosidad" by Puerto Rican singers Jay Wheeler and Towers alongside American rapper Arcángel, Zion & Lennox, De La Ghetto and Puerto Rican rapper Brray.


=== 2021—2022: Esquemas ===
On February 22, 2021, Gomez released the standalone single "Rotate" with Nigerian singer Burna Boy. The song was used in Pepsi commercials featuring soccer players, including Lionel Messi On March 4, she made a cameo in Natasha's music video for "Las Nenas". That same day, Puerto Rican rapper Kevvo released the single "Te Va Bien" with Arcángel and Gomez featuring Darell. The single was certified platinum by the RIAA. On March 5, Gomez collaborated with Puerto Rican record producer Tainy and American singer Trevor Daniel on "F is For Friends" for The SpongeBob Movie: Sponge on the Run soundtrack. On April 14, American R&B and pop group Emotional Oranges released the single "Down to Miami" featuring Gomez. On April 20, Natasha released the single "Ram Pam Pam" with Gomez, as the fourth single from Natasha's second studio album Nattividad and as the lead single from Gomez's second studio album. The single peaked at number fifty-two on the Billboard Global 200, and at number twelve on the Hot Latin Songs, and was certified 4× platinum by the RIAA. They premiered the song on American television on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon on May 17, 2021. On July 15, Argentine rapper Khea released the single "Only One" with Gomez and American singer-songwriter Julia Michaels featuring Jamaican songwriter and producer Di Genius. On August 26, Argentine singer María Becerra released the single "Wow Wow" featuring Gomez, included on her debut studio album Animal. The song peaked at number two in Argentina. On September 10, Mexican singer Sofía Reyes released the single "Mal de Amores" with Gomez, as the lead single of her second studio album of the same name. The single was certified platinum by the RIAA. On September 16, Play-N-Skillz released the single "Baila Así" with Gomez, Thalía and Chiquis. It was certified gold by the RIAA. On October 22, American singer Christina Aguilera released the single "Pa Mis Muchachas" with Gomez and Argentine rapper Nicki Nicole, featuring Argentine singer Nathy Peluso, which served as the lead single from her EP, La Fuerza and is part of her album Aguilera. The single peaked at number thirty-seven on the Hot Latin Songs chart, at number eleven in the Mexico, and was certified platinum by the RIAA. For her work on the album as a featured artist on the track, Gomez was nominated for Album of the Year at the 23rd Annual Latin Grammy Awards. The song garnered three nominations at the same ceremony. In November 2021, Gomez began hosting her own Facebook Watch talk show, titled Face to Face with Becky G. Her first guest was American singer Demi Lovato. On November 26, Gomez released song "Lo Que Yo Diga" as part of the Koati film soundtrack. On November 21, she won Favorite Female Latin Artist at the American Music Awards. On December 1, Gomez released the single "Bella Ciao".
In March 2022, Gomez joined American singer Joe Jonas and American choreographer Sean Bankhead to serve as judges on the MTV & TikTok American music competition series Becoming a Popstar. On March 24, Gomez and Natasha were featured on the song "Zona del Perreo" from Daddy Yankee's last studio album Legendaddy. The song peaked at number 32 on the Hot Latin Songs chart. On April 28, Regional Mexican group Marca MP released the single "Ya Acabó" with Gomez. It peaked at number seven on the Hot Latin Songs chart. The song won Best Collaboration – Regional Mexican at the Latin American Music Awards.
Gomez released her second studio album, Esquemas, in May 2022. It is primarily a latin, pop rock and rap album, focusing more on pop, dance-pop and reggaeton sounds. The album debuted at number 92 in the US, number five in the Top Latin Albums, and debuted number-one on the Billboard Latin Pop Albums, with first-week sales of 11,000 album units. It was nominated for Latin Pop and Album of the Year at the 2022 Billboard Latin Music Awards, and for Favorite Pop Album at the 2023 Latin American Music Awards. It includes "Ram Pam Pam" with Natasha, making the song its lead single. The second single, "Fulanito" with Dominican rapper El Alfa. The single peaked at number 140 on the Global 200, and also peaked at number twenty-four on the Hot Latin Songs, and was certified 7× platinum by the RIAA. The album's commercial success third single, "Mamiii" with Karol G. The single peaked at number four on the Global 200, peaked at number fifteen in the US, surpassing Gomez's highest peak of number sixteen with "Shower", and became her first number-one song on the Hot Latin Songs chart, and was certified 23× platinum by the RIAA (Latin). The song has received numerous awards and nominations including, Favorite Latin Song at the 2022 American Music Awards, Best Urban Song at the 23rd Annual Latin Grammy Awards, and Best Latin at the 2022 MTV Video Music Awards, but ultimately winning Latin Pop/Reggaeton Song of the Year at the 2023 iHeartRadio Music Awards, and three accolades at the 2023 Latin American Music Awards. The fourth and final single from album, "Bailé Con Mi Ex", peaked at number forty-one on the Hot Latin Songs chart, and at number two in Mexico. The single was nominated for the Favorite Pop Song at the 2023 Latin American Music Awards. The record includes new collaborations with American-Venezuelan singer-songwriter Elena Rose, and Guaynaa.
Gomez starred alongside Machine Gun Kelly, Mod Sun, Dove Cameron and Megan Fox in the film Good Mourning, released on May 22. On July 6, Argentine singer Tini released the single "La Loto", a collaboration with Gomez and Anitta, which serves as the seventh single from Tini's fourth studio album Cupido. The single peaked at number 197 on the Global 200, and number seven in Argentina. On July 10, she hosted with Mexican TikTok star Jimena Jiménez in the MTV MIAW Awards in Mexico City. On September 16, Gomez released the standalone single "Amantes" with Spanish singer Daviles de Novelda, which features bachata music, her first song in the genre. On October 13, Gomez appeared alongside Colombian singer Greeicy, Becerra, and Tini on a remix of Rose's song "La Ducha". Gomez was also named in Forbes' 30 Under 30 list in the music category.


=== 2023–present: Esquinas and Encuentros ===
On February 14, 2023, Mexican regional quartet Fuerza Regida released the single "Te Quiero Besar" with Gomez. On March 1, she received the Impact Award at the Billboard Women in Music event. On March 10, she released the standalone single "Arranca" featuring Dominican singer Omega. The single was nominated for the Best Collaboration - Urban at the 2024 Latin American Music Awards. On April 1, she opened the pinnacle event of the WWE, WrestleMania 39, performing "America the Beautiful" and was made an honorary member of the Latino World Order by American professional wrestler Zelina Vega. On April 14 and 21, Gomez performed at the Coachella Festival, and Gomez received the key to City of Coachella. On May 9, Gomez announced her first headlining tour, titled Mi Casa, Tu Casa Tour. It started in Boston, Massachusetts, on September 14, and visited several cities in the United States. On May 12, she was featured in a remix of "I Ain't Worried" by American band OneRepublic. On June 2, Gomez released song "The Fire Inside" from the Flamin' Hot film soundtrack. The song was nominated for the Best Original Song at the 96th Academy Awards. On June 2, she released the song "Take It To The Top" with Nigerian singer Ayra Starr, from the deluxe edition of the soundtrack of the American animated superhero film Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse. On July 20, Nigerian singer Kizz Daniel released the a remix of his single "Cough" featuring Gomez. On August 16, Haitian DJ Michaël Brun released the single "Coming Your Way" with Gomez and English singer Anne-Marie. Gomez voiced Khaji-Da, an entity inside Jaime Reyes' Scarab, in the DC Studios film Blue Beetle, released on August 18.
Gomez released her third studio album, Esquinas, in September 2023. It is primarily a pop rock and latin record, incorporating elements of Regional Mexican, pop and latin pop. The album is a tribute to her grandparents, who emigrated from Mexico to the United States. The album debuted at number 109 in the US, including number seven on the Top Latin Albums, and debuted at number three on the Regional Mexican Albums charts, with first-week sales of 11,000 album units. The album's lead single "Chanel" with Mexican singer Peso Pluma. The collaboration, co-written by the duo with Tito Double P and Grammy-winning producer Édgar Barrera, narrates the story of a failed relationship. The song peaked at number fifty-five in the US, peaked at number forty-six on the Global 200, and peaked at number eight in the Hot Latin Songs, and was certified 15× platinum by the RIAA (Latin). The song received nominations for the 2023 MTV MIAW Awards and 2023 Premios Juventud. Esquinas also produced two other singles: "La Nena" with Mexican singer Gabito Ballesteros, and "Querido Abuelo", the song is dedicated to her grandfather who died in 2021. The fourth single "2ndo Chance" with American regional Mexican music singer Iván Cornejo was released the same day as the album's release. The song peaked at number thirty-four in the Hot Latin Songs. In December, due to the success through the platform TikTok, the song "Por el Contrario", in collaboration with Mexican-American singers Ángela Aguilar and Leonardo Aguilar, was released as the fifth and final single of the album. The music video was released on December 13, on the singer's official YouTube channel. The song debuted at number seventeen on the Hot Latin Songs, peaked at number-one in the Latin Airplay, and became her first number-one song on the Regional Mexican Airplay chart. The song was nominated for the Best Regional Mexican Song at the 25th Annual Latin Grammy Awards, and won for Mariachi/Ranchera Song of the Year at the 2025 Lo Nuestro Awards. The record includes new collaborations with American singer DannyLux, American trio Yahritza y su Esencia and Chiquis. All the other tracks received visualizers. On October 17, Gomez received the key to City of Inglewood. On November 17, South Korean singer Bibi released the single "Amigos" with Gomez.
In January 2024, Gomez appeared as a guest judge on the sixteenth season's premiere of the reality television show RuPaul's Drag Race. On March 15, she released the standalone single "Boomerang". On March 22, Gomez was featured on the song "On My Body" from South African singer Tyla's debut studio album Tyla. On April 25, Gomez, alongside Thalía, Mexican actress Alejandra Espinoza and Puerto Rican actor Carlos Ponce, hosted the Latin American Music Awards in Las Vegas, Nevada. She performed the song alongside Maydon during the ceremony. In May, she signed with new talent agency WME. On May 10, Black Eyed Peas released the single "Tonight" with El Alfa featuring Gomez, as the lead single from the soundtrack of the American buddy cop and action comedy film Bad Boys: Ride or Die. Her collaboration with Brazilian singer Luísa Sonza and Brazilian DJ Papatinho, titled "Flores Pa Ti", was released as part of the film's soundtrack, which was released in the U.S. on the same day. On June 19, she was featured in a remix of "Rewind" by American rapper Blxst and Colombian singer Feid. On August 20, Gomez announced her second headlining tour, titled Casa Gomez: Otro Capítulo Tour. It is set to begin in Chicago, Illinois, on October 11, and visit several cities in the United States. On September 27, American mariachi band Mariachi Divas de Cindy Shea released "Bluetooth" with Gomez, as the lead single from the band's album 25 Aniversario.
Gomez released her fourth studio album, Encuentros in October 2024. It is primarily a pop rock, latin and rap record, incorporating elements of dance-pop, reggaeton, latin pop and Regional Mexican. The album debuted at number fifteen on the Top Latin Albums, and debuted at number nine on the Regional Mexican Albums charts. The album's lead single, "Mercedes", with Mexican singer Óscar Maydon. The single debuted at number four on the Latin Airplay chart and peaked at number one on the Regional Mexican Airplay chart. Encuentros also produced three other singles: "Como Diablos", "Otro Capítulo" and "GomezX4". The record includes new collaborations with Mexican singers Tito Double P, Oscar Ortiz and Delilah. All the other tracks received visualizers.
In February 2025, Emotional Oranges released the single "Candy Gum" featuring Canadian singer Jessie Reyez and Gomez. On the same month, Gomez appeared in the Hulu documentary television series Faces of Music. On April 18, Gomez was featured on the song "Tek" from Nigerian singer Davido's fifth studio album 5ive. Gomez was the focus of the Jennifer Tiexiera-directed documentary film, Rebbeca. The film was premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival in June 2025, the documentary embarks on her most personal and ambitious project to date, her debut Mexican regional album, she is prompted to revisit her roots and dive deep into a beautiful and complicated past. On May 9, she released the single "Que Haces" with Colombian singer Manuel Turizo. The song peaked at number thirty-five in the Hot Latin Songs.


== Artistry ==
Gomez is described as a pop, hip hop, pop rap, latin, and reggaeton artist. She is known for her versatility, often collaborating with different artists from different genres, such as country, EDM, K-pop, and funk, among others. Vocally, she has been described as a soprano. Her debut studio album, Mala Santa, is a latin pop and reggaeton record, incorporating elements of Latin hip hop and urbano. Her second album, Esquemas, followed close, although focusing more on dance-pop and R&B sounds. Her third studio album, Esquinas, focused on Mexican Regional music, an homage to her Mexican roots. Her fourth studio album, Encuentros, is primarily a pop rock, Latin and rap record, incorporating elements of dance-pop, reggaeton, latin pop and regional Mexican.
Gomez has cited late Tejano singer Selena, American singer and actress Jennifer Lopez, Mexican singer and actress Thalía, late Mexican American banda singer-songwriter Jenni Rivera, Colombian singer-songwriter Shakira, and American singer-songwriter Christina Aguilera as influences.


== Business and ventures ==
Gomez began representing CoverGirl in July 2014. As the spokeswoman for the company, she filmed commercials to promote the brand and featured their products in her music videos. In December 2018, Gomez released a makeup collection called Salvaje with cosmetics brand ColourPop Cosmetics. In 2020, she joined the ownership group of Angel City FC of the National Women's Soccer League. In March 2021, Gomez collaborated with PrettyLittleThing, creating the Streetwear Pieces Collection. In 2022, Gomez, along with Argentine singer Tini and Brazilian singer Anitta, was the spokesperson for WhatsApp's "Gender Equality in Music & Beyond" campaign.  In 2023, Gomez collaborated with Patron Tequila. In June, she joined swimwear brand Gonza as new creative director. In 2025, Gomez collaborated with Fabletics on the Becky G x Fabletics Collection. In 2025, Gomez spokesperson for the brand's Garnier Fructis line, which at the top of 2025 introduced its latest innovation: Sleek & Stay Heat Activated Serum.


=== Treslúce Beauty ===
In June 2021, she launched her makeup line, Treslúce Beauty, which is distributed by Ulta Beauty as of March 2022. In alignment with her personal principles, Treslúce Beauty is a celebration of Latino heritage and culture and prides itself in its vegan-friendly, high-performance formulations, crafted to amplify the artistry of its user.


== Philanthropy ==
Gomez has supported and contributed to various charities, organizations, and foundations. These include the following: AIDS Healthcare Foundation, DoSomething, Global Citizen, Make-A-Wish Foundation, Pencils of Promise, Planned Parenthood, Rock the Vote, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, The Salvation Army, Telethon, and UNHCR.


== Personal life ==
Gomez dated American singer Austin Mahone from February to August 2015. In June 2016, it was confirmed that Gomez is in a relationship with American professional soccer player Sebastian Lletget. The couple announced their engagement on December 9, 2022. Lletget apologized for cheating allegations in late March 2023.
While on tour with Fifth Harmony in October 2017, Gomez suffered an "out-of-control fan attack" while in Mexico City. Gomez took to Snapchat to speak about the incident and also revealed that she had been dealing with anxiety issues.


== Achievements ==

Gomez has won three American Music Awards, a Billboard Latin Music Award, an iHeartRadio Music Award, nine Latin American Music Awards (being the second most-awarded female artist), four Lo Nuestro Awards, three People's Choice Awards and eight Premios Juventud. She has been nominated for two Billboard Music Awards and five Latin Grammy Awards (including Album of the Year as a featured artist).
Gomez was honored as one of the Leading Ladies of Entertainment by The Latin Recording Academy in 2018. In 2019, she was awarded the Extraordinary Evolution Award for her evolving work in a short span of years. In 2023, she received the Impact Award at the Billboard Women in Music event. Gomez was awarded the Harvard Foundation Artist of the Year Award.
Billboard featured Gomez on their 21 Under 21 list in 2014, 2015, and 2017. In 2015, Rolling Stone included her on their list of "18 Teens Shaking Up Pop Culture". Gomez was named to Forbes' 30 Under 30 list in the music category.


== Discography ==

Mala Santa (2019)
Esquemas (2022)
Esquinas (2023)
Encuentros (2024)


== Filmography ==

Power Rangers (2017)
Gnome Alone (2017)
A.X.L. (2018)
Good Mourning (2022)
Blue Beetle (2023)
Rebbeca (2025)


== Tours ==

Headlining

Mi Casa, Tu Casa Tour (2023)
Casa Gomez: Otro Capítulo Tour (2024)
Co-headlining tours

La Familia Tour with J Balvin (2015)
Opening act

Demi Lovato – Demi World Tour (2014)
Katy Perry – Prismatic World Tour (2014)
Fifth Harmony – PSA Tour (2017)
Enrique Iglesias – Enrique Iglesias and Pitbull Live! (2017)


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Becky G at IMDb