The Coca-Cola Beverages Northeast, formerly known as Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Northern New England, is a bottler of Coca-Cola, Dr Pepper, and Canada Dry soft drinks in the New England region as well as almost the entirety of upstate New York. The Coca-Cola Company does not own an interest, as the company is 100% owned by Japan-based Kirin Brewery, who until 2018 also owned the rights to the Moxie soft drink nationwide.


== History ==
The Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Northern New England (CCNNE) was founded in Laconia, New Hampshire in 1977. Today it operates 16 distribution centers in all six New England states, as well as upstate New York. It has been a subsidiary of Kirin since 1988.
The first bottling agreement between Coca-Cola and an independent bottler was in 1899 between the company and two young attorneys from Chattanooga. After being joined by a John T. Lupton, they divided their bottling rights among territories in the States. As a result, efficiency and bottle quality improved. By 1909, Coca-Cola had almost 400 bottling operations, most family-owned. In October 2019 CCNNE was renamed Coca-Cola Beverages Northeast.


== Products ==
Coca-Cola Beverages Northeast bottles and/or distributes products from The Coca-Cola Company, Dr Pepper Snapple Group, Nestlé, and Campbell's. There are over 350 varieties of flavours, sizes and packages. The product categories that CCNNE use are Sparkling soft drinks (e.g. Coca-Cola), Still beverages (e.g. Powerade) and Emerging brands (e.g. Glaceau Vitamin Water).

Sparkling soft drinks
Coca-Cola
Coca-Cola Zero
Diet Coke
Sprite (soft drink) Lemon-Lime
Barq's Rootbeer
Fanta Fruit Flavored Soft Drinks
Fresca Sparkling Citrus
Dr Pepper Spicy Cherry
Sunkist (soft drink) Orange
Canada Dry Ginger Ale
Still beverages
Powerade Mountain Blast, Fruit Punch, Orange
Bottled Waters Dasani, Evian, SmartWater
Minute Maid Orange, Apple, Lemonade
Tea Drinks Gold Peak Tea, Nestea
Emerging brands
Full Throttle (drink) Original
Glacéau Vitamin Water Power C, XXX, Revive
Orangina
NOS (drink) Energy Drink


== Notes ==


== External links ==
Official website
Annual Review of the Coca-Cola financial data
Products of the Coca-Cola Bottling Company of Northern New England (CCNNE)