Delek US Holdings, Inc. is an oil refining, logistics and biofuels company founded in 2001 and headquartered in Brentwood, Tennessee.
The company has a platform consisting of:

Four oil refineries with approximately 300,000 barrels per day of crude through put capacity.
Logistics operations including Delek Logistics.
An integrated asphalt business.


== Operations ==
Refining
Delek US owns and operates four inland refineries with a combined crude throughput capacity of 302,000 barrels per day. The refineries are located in Tyler, Texas; Big Spring, Texas; Krotz Springs, Louisiana; and El Dorado, Arkansas.
Delek's refineries process primarily light crude oil sourced from the Permian Basin, East Texas, Gulf Coast and local production. 
Logistics
Delek's logistics segment gathers, transports, and stores crude oil, as well as markets, distributes, transports and stores refined product in West Texas and the Southeast U.S.
Renewables
Delek owns and operates three biodiesel plants with a capacity of approximately 40 million gallons a year, which are located in Cleburne, Texas, Crossett, Arkansas and New Albany, Mississippi.


== History ==
Delek US was founded in 2001 as a fully owned subsidiary of Israeli conglomerate Delek Group. Delek US was introduced in the New York Stock Exchange in 2006, and Delek Group reduced its share over the next decade.
Key events in its history are summarized below:
Acquisitions/Divestitures

May 2001: Acquired MAPCO Express, Inc., with 198 retail fuel and convenience stores
April 2005: Acquired the Tyler Refinery and its related assets
July 2006: Acquired 40 retail fuel and convenience stores from Fast Petroleum
August 2006: Acquired refining equipment, pipelines, storage tanks and terminals from Pride Companies
October 2011: Acquired sole ownership of Lion Oil Company, with a refinery, pipeline and other refining, product terminal, and crude oil pipeline assets in and around El Dorado, Arkansas, and product terminals in Memphis and Nashville, Tennessee
January 2013: Announced agreement to purchase a biodiesel facility in Cleburne, Texas from EQM Technologies & Energy, Inc.
February 2014: Announced agreement to purchase a biodiesel facility in Crossett, Arkansas
November 2016: Completed sale of MAPCO Retail Related Assets for $535 million
March 2018: Sold refineries in Paramount, California and Long Beach, California to World Energy LLC.
November 2018: Announced Big Spring Crude Oil Gathering System in the Permian Basin
May 2019: Acquired 33% Interest in Red River pipeline joint venture
August 2019: Acquired 15% Interest in Wink to Webster Pipeline LLC
November 2019: Announced agreement to purchase a biodiesel facility in New Albany, Mississippi
May 2020: Sold Bakersfield refinery to Global Clean Energy Holdings
June 2022: Acquired 3Bear Energy through Delek's master limited partnership, Delek Logistics Partners, LP. 3Bear's operations included crude oil and gas gathering, processing and transportation businesses, as well as water disposal and recycling operations in the Delaware Basin in New Mexico.
October 2024: Sold its retail network to FEMSA.
Mergers

May 2015: Acquired 33.7 million shares of common stock of Alon USA Energy, Inc, a subsidiary of Alon Israel Oil Co. Ltd. This represented approximately 48% of Alon USA shares outstanding in May 2015
July 2017: Acquired the remaining shares of common stock of Alon USA Energy, Inc. Operations included refining, retail, asphalt, and renewable fuel, including Paramount Petroleum.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website

Business data for Delek US Holdings, Inc.: