Dinesh C. Paliwal (born December 17, 1957) is an Indian American business executive. He is a Partner at Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR) and also serves as Executive Chairman of Marelli. He was removed as the Chairman and chief executive officer (CEO) of Harman International, a provider of audio and infotainment systems for the automotive, consumer, and professional markets, in 2020.
Paliwal has served as a member of the boards of Nestlé, and the board of trustees of Miami University of Ohio.
He has served on the boards of Harman International, ABB, ADT, Bristol Myers, TYCO International, and Embarq Corporation. He was also a member of the CEO Business Roundtable 2003-2020. He had previously served as Chairman of the National Foreign Trade Council, ABB India Ltd., Lummus Global (an oil and gas technology company) and as a Director for the US China Business Council, US India Business Council and International Swimming Hall of Fame. He also served for three years as Economic Advisor to the Governor of Guangdong Province, China.


== Education and career ==
Paliwal, a US citizen born, raised and educated in India, has lived and worked in Australia, China, India, Singapore, Switzerland, and the United States. He earned an MS degree in Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology (Roorkee, India); MS in Applied Science and Engineering and MBA in Finance from Miami University (Oxford, Ohio). In 2019, the board of trustees of Miami University also conferred an honorary Doctor of Laws degree to Dinesh for his ongoing efforts and contributions toward advancing the University's leadership in business, technology, innovation and entrepreneurial endeavors. Before joining Harman he worked at the ABB Group as President Global Markets and Technology. During his 22 years with ABB, he held management positions in five countries and was instrumental in the company's turnaround during the period 2002–2007.
In 2010, Paliwal was named Metro New York Entrepreneur of the Year by Ernst and Young, and received the Indian American Achiever Award by the Global Organization of People of Indian Origin (GOPIO). He received the Pinnacle Award as one of the Outstanding 50 Asian Americans in Business 2012 by Asian American Business Development Center. In 2014, Fortune Magazine named Paliwal in their "Businessperson of the Year" list. He was honored by the T. J. Martell Foundation in 2015 and also by Breakthrough, a global nonprofit, for his contributions in advancing women's causes in 2016. In 2017, Paliwal was named to the inaugural Recode 100, recognizing the year's most influential people in tech, business and media, and B'nai B'rith International honored him with its Distinguished Achievement Award. In the same year, Paliwal also received the Ellis Island Medal of Honor and made a donation to Miami University's Farmer School of Business along with his wife to create the Dinesh and Ila Paliwal Innovation Chair and the Dinesh and Ila Paliwal Scholarship.
Samsung announced its intent to acquire HARMAN for approximately $8 billion in November 2016, with Paliwal continuing to lead the company post-acquisition. The transaction was completed in March 2017.
Paliwal stepped down on April 1, 2020, after nearly 14 years with the company as president and CEO of Harman and served as a senior advisor to the board of directors and to the new CEO, Michael Mauser, until December 2020. It is unclear whether his removal was voluntary or he was forced to step down.


== Early life ==

Paliwal was born on December 17, 1957, in Agra, India as one of seven children. He married Ila Sharma.


== References ==


== External links ==
Harman profile