DWSS (1494 AM), broadcasting as Abante, is a radio station owned by Supreme Broadcasting System and operated by Prage Management Corporation. The station's studio is located at 60 P. Tuazon Boulevard, Barangay Kaunlaran, Cubao, Quezon City, while its transmitter is located along Coloong 1 Road, Barangay Coloong, Valenzuela City.
Several programs of Abante are also aired on Abante TV on SkyCable Channel 85, Converge Channel 79, Cablelink Channel 103, Beautiful Cable TV Philippines (Misamis Oriental), Pagadian Cable TV (Zamboanga del Sur), Parasat Cable Television (Misamis Oriental, Misamis Occidental, Bukidnon, Lanao del Norte, Negros Occidental), Samsung TV Plus, TCL Smart TVs and through selected K5 News FM stations in the Philippines, Blast TV, and on its digital streaming channel DWAR Abante Radyo on YouTube, Facebook, and TikTok.


== Profile ==
The station was established by Masscom Network of the National Council of Churches in the Philippines in 1975 as DWEE. Back then, it was situated on 1380 kHz. In November 1978, it transferred to 1494 kHz due to the adoption of the 9-kHz spacing for medium wave stations per the Geneva Frequency Plan of 1975 (aka GE75), and changed its call letters to DWXY. Sometime in 1980, it was acquired by RADIO Inc. (Radio Corporation of the Philippines) and changed its call letters to DWCJ. The station was located at the now Philippine Christian University campus in Taft Avenue, Malate, Manila. The station then aired the programs similar to the past KZKZ.
In 1988, Ultrasonic Broadcasting System bought the station and changed its call letters to DWLR. It relocated to SYSU Building in Quezon City, Metro Manila. In 1993, it changed its call letters to DWSS and switched to airing Christian music under the name 1494 K-LOVE. Considering the owner's strong family religious background, this was their 1st venture into religious programming way before launching Saved Radio on Energy FM in the 2000s. In 1996, Manny Luzon took over the station's operations and revamped DWSS as a blocktime station with the tagline Sandigan ng Sambayanan.

In 2004, DWSS was sold to FBS Radio Network in exchange of the latter's stations in Dagupan and Cebu. Due to ownership restrictions, its license was assigned to FBS subsidiary Supreme Broadcasting System. Following the trade's consummation, the station transferred to Paragon Plaza in Mandaluyong. It was once home of Nar Pineda, Ducky Paredes, Ruben Ilagan and other Powerhouse Broadcasters since the demise of the old DZXQ (now Radyo La Verdad) in March 2011, as well as the Tagalog-language broadcast of Family Radio during evenings.

In March 2020, at the height of the pandemic, DWSS went off the air. A couple of months later, most of its programs transferred to DWBL.
In May 2024, Prage Management Corporation, owner of tabloid newspaper Abante, took over the station's operations. On July 8, 2024, it went on the air on test broadcast as Abante Radyo. It serves as the terrestrial extension of Abante Teletabloid, the paper's digital news service which was launched in 2022. Its call letters, DWAR, were formerly held by Sonshine Radio's AM radio outlet in Laoag. In mid-2025, it was renamed as Abante to reflect on the radio station's growing presence on cable TV, streaming and social media.
Since August 15, 2025, some programs of Abante, along with Bilyonaryo News Channel's flagship newscast Agenda, began airing on selected K5 News FM provincial stations after inking a partnership agreement with the network's operator 5K Broadcasting Network. 


== Programming ==


== Notable on-air personalities ==
Jerry Codinera
Gerry Esplana
Rey Langit
Rufa Mae Quinto
Korina Sanchez
Pinky Webb


== See also ==
Abante
Bilyonaryo News Channel
Politiko
Bilyonaryo


== References ==


== External links ==
Old Website