Edging, sometimes also referred to as gooning or surfing, is a sexual technique whereby an orgasm is controlled (that is, delayed or prevented). It is practiced alone or with a partner, and involves the maintenance of a high level of sexual arousal for an extended period of time without reaching climax. Orgasm control involves either sex partner being in control of the other partner's orgasm, or a person delaying their own orgasm during sexual activity with a partner or through masturbation. Any method of sexual stimulation can be used to experience controlled orgasm. 
When the controlled orgasm is achieved, the physical sensations are greater as compared to conventional orgasm. Orgasm control has also been referred to as "slow masturbation" and "extended massive orgasm". When practiced by males, direct sexual stimulation without the refractory period after orgasm is sometimes possible.
Edging should not be confused with edgeplay, which refers to a set of sexual practices distinct from edging. It should also not be confused with premature ejaculation, retrograde ejaculation, or the inability to orgasm, all of which describe involuntary medical conditions. The terms edging and gooning have been adopted by Generation Z and older Gen Alpha as brain rot terminology, gaining popularity on TikTok. In internet slang, gooner is often used to refer to pleasure-seekers and porn performers, as well as extreme excitement or obsession in non-sexual contexts.


== In partnered sex ==
During intercourse or other forms of sexual stimulation with a partner, one person stimulates the other(s) and reduces the level of stimulation when approaching orgasm. Erotic sexual denial occurs when the partner who is in control of the other partner's orgasm prolongs the orgasm to allow for an increased level of sexual tension. When a partner eventually provides enough stimulation to achieve an orgasm, it may be stronger than usual due to increased tension and arousal that builds up during the extended stimulation. An example of the use of orgasm control in partnered sex can be seen in BDSM; the partner whose orgasm is being controlled (sometimes referred to as the submissive partner) can be tied up. This  activity is sometimes called tie and tease; if orgasm is denied, it is then known as tease and denial.


== In masturbation ==
When practicing alone in masturbation, orgasm control can heighten sexual pleasure. For a woman, the practitioner can enjoy direct sexual stimulation for longer periods of time, as well as increasing frequency and intensity. For a man, the intensity of masturbation may vary to navigate right to the edge of ejaculation. With orgasm control, a male can experience a more intense orgasm, as well as a larger volume of semen expelled during his ejaculation. One technique, commonly referred to as edging, involves masturbating up until the moment before reaching the plateau phase just before orgasm occurs, and then stopping suddenly before experiencing orgasm, eventually learning to reach and maintain the plateau phase without orgasm occurring until chosen. Either maintaining the plateau phase for some time, or simply repeatedly stopping before orgasm many times during a single masturbation session, may result in a longer, more intense orgasm.


== See also ==

Blue balls (physical condition)
Chastity belt (BDSM device)
Compulsive sexual behaviour disorder (mental disorder)
Coitus reservatus (masturbation technique)
Delayed gratification (masturbation technique)
Erotic sexual denial (masturbation technique)
Eroto-comatose lucidity (masturbation technique)
Forced orgasm (BDSM practice)
Internet addiction (mental disorder)
Loneliness epidemic (global increase in social isolation)
Pornography addiction (mental disorder)
Sensation play (BDSM practice)
Sex addiction (mental disorder)
Sex machine (masturbation device)
Tantric sex (erotic and religious practice)


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Dubois, C.; Danielson, E. C.; Schwirtlich, T.; Beestrum, M.; Eurich, D. T. (November 2025). "Substance use patterns among individuals with problematic pornography use: A scoping review". PLOS Global Public Health. 5 (11) e0004946. Public Library of Science. doi:10.1371/journal.pgph.0004946. PMC 12611143. PMID 41223162.
Alvarez-Segura, M.; El Kasmy, Y.; Francisco, E.; Gallo Martínez, S.; Butjosa, A.; Ortiz Jiménez, E. M. (September 2025). Schaper, Niclas; Vicars, Mark (eds.). "Impact of pornography consumption on children and adolescents: A trauma-informed approach". Frontiers in Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 4 (1567649). Frontiers Media. doi:10.3389/frcha.2025.1567649. PMC 12515835. PMID 41089467.
Villena-Moya, A.; Potenza, M. N.; Granero, R.; Paiva, Ú.; Arrondo, G.; Chiclana-Actis, C.; Fernández-Aranda, F.; Jiménez-Murcia, S.; Normand, E.; Ballester, L.; Mestre-Bach, G. (May 2025). "Sex differences in problematic pornography use among adolescents: A network analysis". BMC Psychology. 13 (347). BioMed Central. doi:10.1186/s40359-025-02624-0. ISSN 2050-7283. PMC 11978135. PMID 40200245. S2CID 277630470.