Jude (born 21 April 2000), known professionally as F1NN5TER, is an English Internet personality known for long-term cross-dressing. A Twitch streamer, TikToker, YouTuber, and OnlyFans model, he began cross-dressing as a campaign in which he would dress as his e-girl persona Rose for a month if he received a certain amount of money in donations. He gained broader attention in 2023 when Twitch temporarily banned him for allegedly violating a policy usually applied only to women. Later in 2023, he donated $50,000 to the transgender medical care provider GenderGP together with a friend. In March 2024, he came out as genderfluid (preferring he/him) and shared that he had started feminising hormone replacement therapy, saying that after cross-dressing "It felt a bit like I'd uncovered a part of myself that I had been purposely shutting down for as long as I could remember, and never questioned why."


== Streaming career and fundraising ==
F1NN5TER has streamed video games on YouTube and Twitch. He would sometimes crossplay as friends' Minecraft avatars as events, and later on-stream as an e-girl character named Rose. In 2020, he began a campaign called "Girl Week" (eventually "Girl Month"), in which he would dress as a girl for a month if he received a certain amount of money in donations. F1NN5TER grew his hair long and gained popularity on TikTok in clips where his e-girl aesthetic included long false eyelashes and thigh-highs adorned with bows. The "Girl Month" campaign resulted in years of cross-dressing and officially ended in 2023 with him explaining that it doesn't feel like "dressing as a girl" anymore, but rather just dressing like himself.
On 7 February 2023, F1NN5TER was suspended from Twitch for three days. While Twitch did not provide a reason publicly, F1NN5TER said that they privately said the ban was for "prolonged touching of female presenting breasts". F1NN5TER, who at the time identified as a cisgender man and a femboy, said that he had been adjusting his bra and opined that "As a man, touching your chest can now be bannable depending on how feminine Twitch sees you :)". According to GameRevolution, Twitch's rules for clothing have long been criticised as vague, and the platform also has a "Pools, Hot Tubs, and Beaches" category. Issy van der Velde of TheGamer criticised Twitch for "deciding a streamer's gender for them" and posed the converse question of whether a masculine-presenting woman would be exempt from the policy F1NN5TER was said to violate, also expressing concerns about how the rule would be applied to trans men. The case was later cited by Charlie Ferguson in the University of Pennsylvania Law Review as an example of how "attire can communicate a message about gender regardless of whether the wearer intended to share said message".
F1NN5TER announced an intention in December 2022 to donate to an organisation, and in May 2023 chose GenderGP, the only private provider of healthcare for transgender youth in the United Kingdom. He donated $50,000 together with a friend and viewer of his, which Watermark compared to Hbomberguy's fundraiser for Mermaids in 2019.


== Transition ==

Many of F1NN5TER's followers viewed him as an egg (someone who has not yet realised they are transgender). He attracted many transgender followers who shared their experiences, which he said helped him better understand his gender over the course of two years.
On 1 March 2024, F1NN5TER uploaded a YouTube video titled "Coming Out", in which he explained that he had begun cross-dressing "for a 'meme'", but that his cross-dressing had attracted more trans viewers, and that through them he had learned more about the transgender community. He said that as he explored his gender, "It felt a bit like I'd uncovered a part of myself that I'd been purposely shutting down for as long as I could remember, and never questioned why." He said that he had been taking feminising hormone therapy and considered himself genderfluid, expressing openness to all third-person pronouns but personally preferring he/him. F1NN5TER added that he is bisexual and closed the video with brief conversations with his parents, who expressed their support.
F1NN5TER for a time dated another transfeminine content creator, Ashley, who described the pair as a "one-two punch", with his videos leading people to her videos on practical aspects of transitioning. The pair's streaming led to parasocial issues in how fans perceived their relationship.


== Other endeavours ==

In season 2 of the MC Championship, a Minecraft tournament, F1NN5TER was on the winning team in events 16 (August 2021) and 23 (July 2022).
The same week as his 2023 Twitch ban, F1NN5TER was quoted on the feminist website The Mary Sue for what he said in response to the criticism of men wearing women's clothing that was expressed by the right-wing advocacy group PragerU: "But what if it's reeeeaaallly fun".
In addition to his streaming career, F1NN5TER is a model on the online video chat platform OnlyFans. He reached the site's top 0.01% in his first week on the platform. After starting his OnlyFans modelling, he stopped doing Minecraft streams, to avoid attracting a younger audience for whom his adult content would be inappropriate.
In November 2025, F1NN5TER revealed he was involved in setting up a non-profit private trans healthcare service in the United Kingdom, named Anne Healthcare.


== Notes ==


== References ==


=== Sources by F1NN5TER ===


== External links ==
 Media related to F1NN5TER at Wikimedia Commons