Haidian (Chinese: 海淀区; pinyin: Hǎidiàn Qū) is a northwest urban district of Beijing, bordering Xicheng and Fengtai.
It is 431 km2 (166 sq mi) in area, making it the second-largest district in urban Beijing area (after Chaoyang), and is home to 3,133,469 inhabitants as of November 2020. According to the latest 2025 census data, the population of Haidian District is 3.122 million.


== Administrative division ==
Haidian is divided into 22 subdistricts and 7 towns.


== History ==
According to historical accounts, the name Haidian reflects the region’s water-rich geography: the character ‘海’ (hǎi) evokes a broad, sea-like expanse, while ‘淀’ (diàn) refers to marshes or shallow ponds, both of which were once characteristic of the area.
Haidian was originally a village outside of Beijing's Inner City. It was first built in the Yuan dynasty and became one of the eight major business areas of the capital during the Qing dynasty and was the seat of such old shops as Lotus White, Quanjude and Hongbin House. The famed Old Summer Palace and Summer Palace, two grand imperial gardens are also among its reputed features. It became a university district after the building of the Tsinghua University and Yenching University campus in the early twentieth century. It is mentioned in Lao She's novel Camel Xiangzi as an academic village for students. After the foundation of the People's Republic, it was deliberately developed as a university area, with many of the Yan'an institutions moving there. It officially became an administrative district in June 1954. Since the reform and opening up, it has become the heart of China's IT industry. In the words of Time magazine:

Like Paris' Champs-Élysées or New York's Broadway, Haidian is a celebration of a national myth: China's ability to change itself and become, once again, great among nations.
During the later half of the 1990s, out of the Beijing districts, Haidian had the highest per capita GDP. During that period the GDP of Haidian (1) District grew by double digits each year.


== Transportation ==
The northwestern stretches of the 3rd Ring Road, 4th Ring Road, 5th Ring Road and 6th Ring Road all run through the area.


=== Metro and light rail ===
Haidian is currently served by 13 metro lines of the Beijing Subway and one light rail line:

      Line 1 - Wukesong, Wanshoulu, Gongzhufen  10 , Military Museum  9 
      Line 4 - Anheqiao North, Beigongmen, Xiyuan  16 , Yuanmingyuan Park, East Gate of Peking University, Zhongguancun, Haidian Huangzhuang  10 , Renmin University  12 , Weigongcun, National Library  9   16 
      Line 6 - Liaogongzhuang, Tiancun, Haidian Wuluju, Cishousi  10 , Huayuanqiao, Baishiqiao South  9 , Erligou  16 
      Line 8 - Yuxin, Xixiaokou, Yongtaizhuang
      Line 9 - National Library  4   16 , Baishiqiao South  6 , Baiduizi, Military Museum  1 
      Line 10 - Lianhua Qiao, Gongzhufen  1 , Xidiaoyutai, Cishousi  6 , Chedaogou, Changchun Qiao  12 , Huoqiying, Bagou  Xijiao , Suzhou Jie  16 , Haidian Huangzhuang  4 , Zhichunli, Zhichun Lu  13 , Xitucheng  Changping , Mudanyuan  19 , Jiandemen
      Line 12 - Sijiqing Qiao, Landianchang, Changchun Qiao  10 , Suzhou Qiao  16 , Renmin Daxue  4 , Dazhong Si  13 , Jimen Qiao  Changping , Beitaipingzhuang  19 
      Line 13 - Dazhong Si  12 , Zhichun Lu  10 , Wudaokou, Shangdi, Qinghe railway station  Changping , Xi'erqi  Changping 
      Line 15 - Qinghua Donglu Xikou, Liudaokou  Changping , Beishatan
      Line 16 - Bei'anhe, Wenyanglu, Daoxianghulu, Tundian, Yongfeng, Yongfeng South, Xibeiwang, Malianwa, Nongda Nanlu, Xiyuan  4 , Wanquanhe Qiao, Suzhou Jie  10 , Suzhou Qiao  12 , Wanshousi, Guojia Tushuguan (National Library)  4  9 , Erligou  6 , Ganjiakou, Yuyuantan Dongmen (Yuyuantan Park East Gate), Muxidi  1 
      Line 19 - Mudanyuan  10 , Beitaipingzhuang  12 
      Changping line - Xi'erqi  13 , Qinghe railway station  13 , Zhufangbei, Qinghe Xiaoyingqiao, Xuezhiyuan, Liudaokou  15 , Xueyuanqiao, Xitucheng  10 , Jimen Qiao  12 
      Xijiao line - Fragrant Hills, Botanical Garden, Wan'an, Chapeng, West Gate of Summer Palace, Bagou  10 


=== Suburban Railway ===
Haidian is served by one commuter line operated by Beijing Suburban Railway (BCR).

     Huairou–Miyun line - Qinghe railway station


== Government and infrastructure ==

The China National Space Administration has its headquarters in the district. The Beijing Aerospace Flight Control Center which serves as the central command center for the Chinese space program is also located in the district.

The Ministry of Science and Technology is located in Yangfangdian, neighboring the China Central Television building (completed in 1986) within the district. The China National Intellectual Property Administration has its headquarters in Haidian, near Jimen Bridge. The State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs (SAFEA) was formerly located in Zhongguancun.
The People's Liberation Army Military Music Hall is located in the district.
The Ministry of State Security has a number of major facilities in the district.


== Economy ==

In 2017, the regional GDP was 592.48 billion yuan, with a GDP per capita at 170.8 thousand yuan (25293 US dollars).
A central part of Haidian's economy, the Zhongguancun electronics district, hosts the Beijing offices of many software and computer-technology companies.

Baidu has its headquarters in the Baidu Campus.
ByteDance (developer of Douyin / TikTok) has its global headquarters at Dazhongsi Square, Haidian District.
Google has its Beijing office in Tsinghua Science Park Bldg 6
Lenovo has its global headquarters in Lenovo Campus, Haidian District.
Sohu has its headquarters in the Sohu.com Internet Plaza.
Sinosteel's headquarters are in the Sinosteel Plaza (中钢国际广场) in Haidian District.
Youku has its headquarters on the fifth floor of Sinosteel Plaza.
Wumart has its headquarters in the Wumart Commercial Building (物美商业大厦; Wù Měi Shāngyè Dàshà) in Haidian District.
aigo's head office is in the Ideal Plaza (理想国际大厦) in the Haidian District.
China Postal Airlines has its headquarters on the 11th through 14th floors of the Ziyu Office Building (紫玉写字楼) in Haidian District.
Sinovac Biotech
The Beijing Civil Aircraft Technology Research Center of COMAC (北京民用飞机技术研究中心) has its offices on the 8th floor of the Beijing Olympic Building (北京奥运大厦) in Haidian District.
Xiaomi has its headquarters in the Huarun Wucaicheng Office Building (华润五彩城写字楼).
Nuctech.
New Oriental
Everbright International has its Beijing office in the Beijing International Building (北京国际大厦) in Zhongguancun.
Grab has its Beijing office in Raycom Infotech Park.


== Education ==


=== Higher education ===

Institutions of higher education in Haidian include:

Beihang University (formerly Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics)
Beijing Film Academy
Beijing Foreign Studies University
Beijing Forestry University
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Language and Culture University
Beijing Normal University
Beijing Sport University
Capital Normal University
China Agricultural University
China University of Geosciences Beijing
China University of Political Science and Law
Minzu University of China
Peking University
Renmin University of China
Tsinghua University
University of International Relations
University of Science and Technology Beijing


=== Primary and secondary education ===

The Beijing Municipal Education Commission (北京市教育委员会), the local education authority, has its headquarters in the Beijing Olympic Building.
Institutions of secondary education 

Beijing Bayi School
Beijing 101 Middle School
Affiliated High School of Peking University
The High School Affiliated to Renmin University of China
Tsinghua University High School
Private schools include:

Beijing Haidian Foreign Language Shi Yan School (elementary through senior high school)
Beijing Haidian International School
Saint Paul American School


== Communities ==
Zhongguancun
Wudaokou
Madian
Xinjiangcun (demolished)


== Important areas in Haidian District ==


== Sports ==
The Chinese Ice Hockey Association, which governs ice hockey and bandy in China, has its offices at 56, Zhongguacun South Street in Haidian District.


== Gallery ==


=== Haidian's Technology hubs ===


== Climate ==
Haidian has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dwa). The average annual temperature in Haidian is 12.8 °C (55.0 °F). The average annual rainfall is 557.3 mm (21.94 in) with July as the wettest month. The temperatures are highest on average in July, at around 26.5 °C (79.7 °F), and lowest in January, at around −3.2 °C (26.2 °F).


== Sister cities ==
Since 1992, Haidian District has signed official papers and established Sister City relationship with 14 cities and districts from 10 countries of 4 continents. Some sister cities are shown below:
South America

 Santa Fe, Argentina (May 2010)
 La Falda, Cordoba, Argentina (10 September 2009)
North America

 Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States (8 February 2008)
 Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, United States (15 April 1998)
Europe

 Savonlinna, Finland (9 March 2016)
 Olympia, Peloponnesus, Greece (28 February 2008)
 Groningen, Netherlands (19 October 2004)
 Bures-sur-Yvette, Massy, Palaiseau, in Paris Region, France (4 October 1994)
East Asia

 Seodaemun-gu, Seoul, South Korea (27 September 1995)
 Nerima, Tokyo, Japan (13 October 1992)


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Haidian District, Beijing Municipality (in English)
Haidian District, Beijing Municipality (in Chinese)