Italian brainrot is a series of Internet memes that emerged in early 2025 characterized by surrealist and absurd images of AI-generated creatures who are given pseudo-Italian names. The phenomenon quickly spread across social media platforms such as TikTok and Instagram, owing to its combination of synthesized "Italian" voiceovers, grotesque or humorous visuals, abstractism, and nonsensical narrative.


== Description ==
Italian brainrot is characterized by absurd images or videos created by generative artificial intelligence. It typically features hybrids of animals with everyday objects, food, and weapons. They are given Italianized names or use stereotypical cultural markers and are accompanied by AI-generated audio of an Italian man's narration, which is often nonsensical. The names of these characters often have Italian suffixes, such as -ini or -ello. These characters combine elements of surrealism, visual anxiety (uncanny valley) and internet irony, reflecting the post-ironic humor of Generation Z.
The term brain rot was Oxford Word of the Year in 2024, and refers to the deteriorating effect on one's mental state when overconsuming "trivial or unchallenging content" online. It can also refer to the content itself. Online users often use this label to acknowledge the ridiculousness of Italian brainrot, while recognising the growing amount of AI slop present online. Fans have created various stories featuring characters from Italian brainrot, forming a type of Internet folklore with overly dramatic storylines and voices.


== Origin ==
In October 2023, Internet users created various Italian memes about American actor and wrestler Dwayne Johnson in which he rhymes about absurd topics. In one video, Johnson would use the nonsense word "Tralalero tralala", and would later rhyme it with "smerdo pure nell'aldilà" ("I shit even in the afterlife"). The phrase would later be used to create the basis of Italian brainrot.
Although the exact origin of Italian brainrot is hard to pinpoint, the character Tralalero Tralala is widely considered to be the first example of the trend. The creation of the character is often attributed to the TikTok user @eZburger401, who reportedly posted a video featuring the character in January 2025. The user was banned after posting, potentially due to its accompanying audio containing profanity and blasphemy against the Abrahamic God in Italian. Later, user @elchino1246 posted a video using Tralalero Tralala's audio, accompanied with an image of a shark mixed with a pigeon. Lastly, on 13 January 2025, user @amoamimandy.1a created a now deleted post using the audio, instead using an AI-generated image of a shark with shoes. This video gained 7 million views.


== Characters ==

Italian brainrot features various AI-generated characters. Several characters are hybrids, often combining animals with everyday objects and various fruits. Other characters are combinations of pre-existing ones, resulting in excessively long names.

Tralalero Tralala
The first viral character of the genre – a three-"legged" shark in Nike sneakers described as athletic, being able to run at superhuman speeds and jump high.
Bombardiro Crocodilo
A hybrid creature with the head of a crocodile and the body of a World War II-era twin-engine bomber. Closely related to it is a goose with fighter jet wings named Bombombini Gusini.

Tung Tung Tung Sahur
An anthropomorphic wooden plank who holds a baseball bat. Although considered part of Italian brainrot, it has Indonesian origin. The "Tung Tung Tung" in its name is onomatopoeia of how Indonesians traditionally beat kentungan slit drums to commence suhur, the pre-dawn meal that Muslims eat before fasting during Ramadan. The word tung also means "rumbling" in Sundanese, spoken in Indonesia. @noxaasht originally made the character in February 2025, and it has become its own meme outside the context of Italian brainrot. In May 2025, Indonesian production house Dee Company expressed interest in making a film based on it.
Ballerina Cappuccina
A female ballerina wearing a tutu and pointe shoes with a cappuccino mug as a head. The original meme featured her pirouetting gracefully. She is married to a ninja named Cappuccino Assassino, who kidnapped her prior to their marriage. She has a sister named Espressona Signora.
Chimpanzini Bananini
A chimpanzee with a banana as a body, who has been described as "indestructible" and considered one of the genre's "main characters".
Lirili Larila
A bipedal cactus-elephant hybrid wearing sandals who has the ability to control time.
Trippi Troppi
Often depicted as a cat with a shrimp's body, though some videos use the name to describe an obese bear with the head of a fish. The latter design has been nicknamed the "King of the Sea", having gained its massive weight from eating everything it sees underwater.


== Reception ==
The likenesses of some Italian brainrot characters have been used to sell toys and non-fungible tokens, as well as being the centerpiece of the popular Roblox game Steal a Brainrot. Italian brainrot also inspired a variety of volatile meme coins, such as "Italianrot", which was launched in March 2025. Italian brainrot gained notoriety in many regions such as the United States, South Korea, and Germany. Various brands have replicated the memes for use in marketing content on social media. Hungarian prime minister Viktor Orbán released a TikTok video where a 3D model of Tung Tung Tung Sahur is seen dancing in a government meeting. In Italy, several newsstands began selling "Skifidol Italian Brainrot Trading Card Games", inspired by the memes and commercialized for a younger audience. The release led to a noticeable rise in Gen Alpha consumers, with L'Espresso comparing the surge to the popularity of Garbage Pail Kids cards during their Italian debut.
Polish radio channel Polskie Radio noted that the meme is popular among Generation Alpha "because it's stupid, funny, and veeeery  [sic] addictive". Polskie Radio highlighted how the meme has been adapted into other media, such as Roblox games, music remixes, and quizzes. Radio France Internationale called the usage of pseudo-Italian names amongst characters "a bit problematic". Daily German newspaper Die Tageszeitung called Italian brainrot a "creative approach to technology, language, and pop culture". China's Legal Daily compared its popularity among young children in the country to Elsagate. In 2025, Panini released an Italian brainrot sticker album.


=== Controversial audio ===

Tralalero Tralala and Bombardiro Crocodilo memes have been accused of being Islamophobic, as lyrics of Tralalero Tralala videos mock Allah in Italian, although some Italian users have pointed out that blasphemy is often used as a filler word in Italian, and that the videos had no Islamophobic intent. On the other hand, Bombardiro Crocodilo has been criticized for making light of the Gaza genocide, since some videos using his Italian narration describe the character bombing children in the Gaza Strip and the rest of Palestine. This has caused concerns regarding casual cruelty and desensitization. The full narration of Bombardiro is as follows:


== See also ==
Shitposting – Intentionally posting poor-quality social media posts
Skibidi Toilet – 2020s webseries also known for its surreal humor
YouTube Poop – Web video genre also known for surreal humor
Steal a Brainrot – A video game based on Italian brainrot
6-7 – A meme based on numbers from Doot Doot, a song by rapper Skrilla, as a trend


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Italian brainrot at Wikimedia Commons
 The dictionary definition of Italian brainrot at Wiktionary
 Quotations related to Italian brainrot at Wikiquote