John Bouvier Kennedy Schlossberg (born January 19, 1993) is an American political commentator and author. He is the son of Caroline Kennedy and Edwin Schlossberg. Through his mother, he is the only grandson of President John F. Kennedy and First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.
On November 11, 2025, Schlossberg announced he is running to be the Democratic candidate in New York's 12th congressional district in the 2026 U.S. House of Representatives election. He is running for the seat being vacated by incumbent Jerry Nadler, who is retiring.


== Early life and education ==
John Bouvier Kennedy Schlossberg was born in New York City on January 19, 1993. Known as "Jack", he is the youngest of three children of designer and artist Edwin Schlossberg and author and diplomat Caroline Kennedy. He has two older sisters: Rose and Tatiana. Schlossberg is named after his maternal grandfather, John F. Kennedy, who served as U.S. president (1961–1963) and as U.S. senator from Massachusetts (1953–1960), and matrilineal great-grandfather, John Vernou Bouvier III, a Wall Street stockbroker. Senator Ted Kennedy was his grand-uncle as well as godfather.
His father comes from an Orthodox Jewish family of Ashkenazi Jewish descent from Ukraine, and his mother is a Catholic of Irish, French, Scottish, and English descent. He was raised Catholic, but his mother would also "incorporate Hanukkah" in the family's holiday celebrations. Schlossberg and his two older sisters, Rose and Tatiana, were primarily raised in Manhattan's Upper East Side, and have also spent significant time at Red Gate Farm, the Aquinnah, Massachusetts, estate of their maternal grandmother, the First Lady Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy Onassis, while growing up.
Schlossberg attended Collegiate School. In eighth grade, he co-founded ReLight New York, a nonprofit organization that installed energy-efficient compact fluorescent lights in low-income housing developments. In 2010, Schlossberg worked in Washington, D.C., as a senate page and the following year, as a senate intern. He then attended Yale University, graduating in 2015 with a degree in history, with a focus on Japanese history. While at Yale, Schlossberg was known to perform stand-up comedy, was a member of the Sigma Phi Epsilon fraternity, and wrote for the Yale Daily News, and The Yale Herald where he was an editor in chief.
Schlossberg lived and worked in Japan before enrolling at Harvard University where he graduated from the joint Juris Doctor – Master of Business Administration program at Harvard Law School and Harvard Business School in 2022. In February 2023, he passed the New York State bar exam.


== Career ==
Since 2011, Schlossberg has written for numerous publications and news outlets, including Time, The Washington Post, New York Magazine, Politico, and CNN. He has also written op-eds for The New York Times, USA Today, and HuffPost.
In 2015, Schlossberg started working at Rakuten, a Japanese internet and e-commerce company, in Tokyo. He also worked at the Japanese distillery Suntory. He met Hiroshi Mikitani, the CEO of Rakuten, while visiting Sendai accompanying his mother on her duties as US ambassador to Japan. Schlossberg returned to the United States in 2016 to work as a staff assistant in the State Department's Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs. He had a cameo role in the eighth-season finale of the television show Blue Bloods in 2018.
Schlossberg began working for Vogue as a political correspondent in 2024 after graduating from Harvard Law School and passing the bar exam.


=== Social media ===
Schlossberg maintains active and public profiles across several social media platforms, including Instagram, TikTok, and X (Twitter), having nearly 2 million followers. Maureen Dowd described his social media personality as "charismatic — and sometimes pugnacious, crude and off-the-wall". Dowd says he "feigns being crazy", and "spars and trolls" and "engages in high jinks".


== Political aspirations ==
Schlossberg first became interested in politics in 2007, when then-Illinois senator Barack Obama began his presidential primary campaign. He recalled that he was never forced to enter politics but Obama's campaign inspired him to learn about it and to study the legacy of his grandfather, John F. Kennedy. In 2012, when asked about his interest in entering politics, Schlossberg stated: "Politics definitely interests me. I'm most interested in public service. I think that's something that I got from being part of my family, which is such an honor." He has accompanied his mother Caroline in her duties as ambassador to Japan and Australia.
In the succeeding years, Schlossberg took an increasingly active role in the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston where he served as chair of the selection committee for the New Frontier Award until its last and 20th ceremony in 2023. Schlossberg has also served as event host, presenter and member of the annual Profile in Courage Award selection committee.


=== Democratic National Committee ===

In August 2020, Schlossberg gave a virtual address on the second night of the 2020 Democratic National Convention with his mother, Caroline, and endorsed Joe Biden's run for the presidency. In 2023, Schlossberg publicly criticized the presidential campaign of his first cousin once removed, Robert F. Kennedy Jr., and supported Biden’s re-election.
Schlossberg gave his first in-person speech on the second night of the 2024 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, where he endorsed Kamala Harris. In September 2024, Schlossberg became co-chair of the environmental organization Climate Power's campaign "Too Hot Not to Vote", an initiative designed to "engage, educate and motivate people to vote for climate and clean energy champions” in the 2024 presidential election. Media outlets have portrayed Schlossberg as a "new face" of the Kennedy family, and a "new hope" of the Democratic Party.


=== U.S. House of Representatives race ===
Following Congressman Jerry Nadler's September 2025 announcement that he would not seek re-election in 2026, Schlossberg expressed interest in mounting a campaign for Nadler's congressional seat, New York's 12th congressional district. On September 7, he announced he was forming an exploratory committee for a potential congressional run. On November 12, 2025, he announced his candidacy for New York's 12th congressional district in the 2026 elections.


== References ==


== External links ==

Official website 
Jack Schlossberg at IMDb
Appearances on C-SPAN