Maggie Cheung (Cheung Man-yuk; Chinese: 張曼玉; pinyin: Zhāng Mànyù; born 20 September 1964) is a Hong Kong actress widely celebrated as one of the most iconic and influential performers in the history of Asian cinema, revered by both audiences and film critics alike. Over the course of her two-decade acting career, she amassed an extraordinary array of accolades, including five Hong Kong Film Awards and five Golden Horse Awards—two of the most prestigious honors in Chinese-language cinema. Internationally, she catapulted to global renown with a Best Actress win at the Berlin International Film Festival for her tour de force performance in Center Stage (1991), followed by another Best Actress trophy at the Cannes Film Festival for Clean (2004)—a milestone that solidifies her status as the only Asian actress outside Europe and North America to secure acting distinctions twice at the "Big Three" European international film festivals.  
Cheung first rose to prominence in the 1980s, gaining wide recognition through her collaboration with Jackie Chan in the Police Story film series. She quickly expanded her work from commercial action and comedy to dramatic roles, appearing in films such as As Tears Go By (1988), Days of Being Wild (1990), Irma Vep and Comrades, Almost a Love Story (both 1996).Her international breakthrough came with Wong Kar-wai's In the Mood for Love (2000), which not only gained her worldwide fame but also received widespread acclaim, ranking fifth on Sight & Sound magazine's 2022 list of the top 100 films in film history. The website of Entertainment Weekly in the United States once listed the "51 classic performances overlooked by the Oscars" in the 86-year history of the Oscars, and Cheung's performance in In the Mood for Love became one of the only two Asian performances on the list. 
Maggie Cheung has served as a juror for the Berlin International Film Festival, Venice International Film Festival, and Cannes Film Festival, and is a voting member of the Academy Awards. The New York Times named her one of the "22 Greatest Performers of the Year"; she ranked 22nd among actresses on Kinema Junpo's "Top 100 Foreign Film Stars of All Time". She has also been honored with awards including the Outstanding Artistic Achievement Award at the Montreal World Film Festival, the Outstanding Contribution to Film Award at the Shanghai International Film Festival, and the Medal of the City of Paris in Paris, in recognition of her extraordinary achievements in her acting career and her contributions to promoting cultural exchanges between Asia and Europe. 
By the late 2000s, Cheung has largely stepped back from acting, making only occasional public appearances at festivals, fashion events, and industry ceremonies. Beyond acting, she has taken on selective creative and philanthropic roles, including serving as a UNICEF ambassador.


== Early life ==
Maggie Cheung was born in Hong Kong on 20 September 1964 to Shanghainese parents. She attended St. Paul's Primary Catholic School in Happy Valley, where she began at the primary one level. Her family emigrated from Hong Kong to the United Kingdom when she was eight. She spent part of her childhood and adolescence in Bromley, London, and attended St Edmund's School, Canterbury. She returned to Hong Kong at the age of 18 in 1982 for a vacation but ended up staying for modelling assignments and other commitments. She also briefly had a sales job at the Lane Crawford department store.
In 1983, Cheung entered the Miss Hong Kong pageant and won the first runner-up and the Miss Photogenic award as well. She was a semi-finalist in the Miss World pageant the same year. After two years as a TV presenter, it led to a contract with TVB (the television arm of the Shaw Bros. Studio).
Cheung is a polyglot as a result of her upbringing in Hong Kong and England, ten years' stay in Paris and five years' stay in Beijing. In Center Stage, Cheung performed in Cantonese, Mandarin, and Shanghainese fluently, switching languages with ease. In Clean, she performed in fluent English, French, and Cantonese.


== Career ==


=== 1984–1987: Early work ===
Shortly after her debut, Maggie Cheung broke into the film industry by starring in the comedy Prince Charming (1984), which became a box office hit. Her standout performance caught the attention of Jackie Chan, who subsequently cast her as May—a long-suffering girlfriend—in the 1985 film Police Story. The movie achieved tremendous success, catapulting Cheung to overnight stardom and cementing her popularity across Asia. 


=== 1988–1994: Breakthrough ===
Despite her success, Cheung found herself typecast in the roles of comics or weak, clumsy women. Realizing this, Cheung wanted to break away by seeking more dramatic roles. She got this opportunity when Wong Kar-wai cast her in As Tears Go By (1988), the first of her many collaborations with Wong.

Cheung often cites the film as the piece that truly began her serious acting career, and she won critical praise for it. In 1989–1990, she won Best Actress awards at the Golden Horse Award and Hong Kong Film Award for her work in Full Moon in New York and A Fishy Story respectively. Rolling Red Dust won the Golden Horse Award for Best Supporting Actress.
In 1991, she became the first Chinese performer to win a Best Actress Award at the prestigious Berlin Film Festival for her work in Center Stage. Cheung made a historic contribution to China in the performance award. With this film, Maggie Cheung won the Best Actress Award at the Taiwan Golden Horse Film Awards, the Best Actress Award at the Hong Kong Film Awards, and many other awards.
Cheung subsequently proved her versatility with roles in action films. Her performance in the sci-fi martial arts smash hit The Heroic Trio (1992) and its sequel, Executioners (1993), impressed both critics and audiences with her martial arts skills. Also in a departure from her usual roles, Cheung played a beautiful and vicious femme fatale in New Dragon Gate Inn (1992).
In the film Green Snake (1993), she played a snake demon who transformed into a human form.
She was both good and evil, yearning for human emotions while feeling confused about them.
In Wong Kar-wai's film Ashes of Time (1994), she almost carried the soul of the character with "static performance": without fierce dramatic conflicts, she conveyed turbulent emotions through eyes, gestures and silence.


=== 1996–2004: International prominence ===
After having acted in more than 68 movies, most of which were action films, in less than a decade, she decided to take her career in another direction. She took a two-year sabbatical and used the time to reflect upon which kinds of roles interested her. She began getting interested in art and music, she travelled and perfected her language studies.

Then she returned to the set, but began to carefully select the co-productions and directors. After taking a break in 1994, Cheung returned to film Olivier Assayas' Irma Vep (1996), which helped her break into the international scene.The film was shortlisted for the Un Certain Regard section of the Cannes Film Festival. That same year, she won further acclaim for her work in the romantic film Comrades: Almost a Love Story, in which she played one of a pair of lovers kept apart for ten years by fate. With this film, she won the Golden Horse Award in Taiwan, the Hong Kong Film Awards and the Best Actress in the Asia-Pacific Film Festival. The film was selected as a classic unit of Venice Film Festival in 2013.
In 1997, she made her first English-language film in Wayne Wang's Chinese Box (1997). Cast as a mysterious young woman named Jean, Cheung held her own alongside the more internationally well-established stars, Jeremy Irons and Gong Li. The film was shortlisted for the Venice Film Festival and won the Best Music Award.
After her 1998 marriage to Olivier Assayas, Cheung stayed mainly in France. In the same year, she won the Best Actress Award at the Hong Kong Film Awards for the fourth time for her performance in the film The Soong Sisters (1997).
She returned to Hong Kong to film In the Mood for Love (2000), which won critical acclaim and a fourth Taiwanese Golden Horse Award for Best Leading Actress for Cheung. Won the Best Actress Award at the Hong Kong Film Awards for the fifth time. The film was shortlisted in the main competition unit of Cannes Film Festival, and won the French film César Awards, the German film Laura Award and the best foreign language film. British Academy Film Awards, David di Donatello Awards, Best Foreign Language Film Nomination. In 2000, it represented Hong Kong at the Oscar Awards for the best foreign language film.
In 2002, she starred in Zhang Yimou's Hero. The film was nominated for multiple honors, including the Oscar Award and Golden Globe for Best Foreign Language Film, and was shortlisted for the main competition unit of the Berlin International Film Festival. It was named the No. 1 best film in the world by Time magazine in 2004. Hero (2002) has an important influence in the history of Chinese cinema. As the Chinese film with the highest investment and box office that year, it was also the first Chinese film to exceed 100 million yuan at the domestic box office, eventually reaching 250 million yuan.
In 2004, she won the Best Actress award at the Cannes Film Festival for her role as a mother who tries to kick her drug habit and reconcile with her long-lost son in Clean (2004). She is the first Asian actress to win this honor. In 2005, the film Clean (2004) was nominated for the Best Actress Award in the French César Awards.


=== 2005–present: Reduced work and retirement ===
After 2005, Cheung gradually reduced her film production and turned to music, art and other fields. During this period, she did not star in new feature films, but appeared in public view in the form of guest appearances or attending international activities. Until around 2013, she basically faded out of the film industry and focused on her personal life and cross-border creation.

In 2005, she won the artistic contribution award of the Montreal International Film Festival, and was selected as one of the "Top 100 Outstanding Actors of China Film in a Hundred Years" in the same year, and was awarded as "National First Class Actor".
In 2006, for the first time in the history of the 59th Cannes Film Festival (2006), the photographic image of an Asian actress-Maggie Cheung's style in In the Mood for Love was used in official posters.
On 7 February 2007, The New York Times rated Cheung as one of the 22 Great Performers in 2006 for her Cannes winning role as Emily in Clean. In the same year, she won the Outstanding Contribution Award of Chinese in Shanghai International Film Festival.
After 20 years of making movies, she decided to retire from acting to pursue a career as a film composer. She had mentioned she would like to compose music and paint after having fulfilled her acting potential. Her last film appearance was as Mazu, Chinese goddess of the sea, in the film Ten Thousand Waves (2010) by British filmmaker and installation artist Isaac Julien. In the same year, Maggie Cheung served as "UNICEF Ambassador to China" and devoted herself to helping improve poverty-stricken areas in China.

In July 2011, she was awarded a doctor honoris causa at the University of Edinburgh.
Cheung retired from acting in 2013 and has since kept a low profile. In November, at the kind invitation of director Hou Hsiao-hsien, Maggie Cheung returned to the ceremony where she won the best actress award for the first time as the ambassador of the 50th Golden Horse Award, and has never attended any award ceremony since then.
In April, 2014, the 33rd Hong Kong Film Awards screened the theme short film "Light and Shadow of the Times" edited by Maggie Cheung. The short film briefly described the development of Hong Kong films with the background of major historical events in contemporary Hong Kong.
In 2016, the Academy Film Archives and David Bordwell launched the "Maggie Cheung: Center Stage" retrospective series. Hailed as a classic icon of Chinese cinema, she has a body of work spanning East and West, blending classical charm with modern transnational elegance, and is internationally recognized as an iconic symbol of contemporary Chinese femininity.
In 2017, she was invited to become a voting member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (Oscar).
On April 17, 2024, just as the "100-day countdown to the Paris Olympic Games" and "the 60th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and France", Maggie Cheung was invited by the state to act as the ambassador of the "China-France Badminton Charity Festival" and attend the event together with Juliette Binoche.


== Retirement life ==
In May 2014, Cheung performed at the 2014 Strawberry Music Festival (Shanghai and Beijing).
On November 22, 2022, Cheung opened a China version of TikTok account. She said that she found these video clips while cleaning up old files on her computer. She wrote: "When I watched these videos again, I suddenly realized that time passed too fast." She occasionally shares old materials of her past work or life on the platform.
On September 20, 2023, Cheung cooperated with OLAY brand again and appeared in the camera to shoot a short film.
On September 3, 2024, GQ magazine published a document. "Maggie Cheung Walked Away From Acting 20 Years Ago, but Her Legend Endures". Raymond Ang, writer of the article tried to contact Cheung for an interview but declined to be interviewed and Ang by saying: When I began work on this story in the spring, I reached out to Cheung's publicist of several years, trying to see if she might be open to doing an interview. It only took two weeks to get a polite but firm rejection. "Ms. Cheung has decided not to participate in the interview." her publicist wrote in an email. "She did not give a reason, but she's been turning down almost all press opportunities for quite awhile."
She turned down BFI's invitation to participate in their 2024 retrospective as well. "It does add to the mystique," Kimberley Sheehan, the programmer of the retrospective, stated. "It's almost more fitting she's not coming."
In August 2025, Cheung created a public Xiaohongshu page, quickly amassing over one million followers after posting several short announcement videos for the page.


== Advertising endorsement ==
2001–2002 Jean-Louis Scherrer image ambassador
2003 Olay Global brand spokesperson
2005 Mandarin Oriental Hotel Group brand ambassador
2008-2009 Piaget Global brand ambassador


== Personal life ==
Cheung married French director Olivier Assayas in 1998; they divorced in 2001. She began a relationship with German architect Ole Scheeren in 2007. The relationship ended in 2011.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===

Short film


=== Television ===


== Awards and nominations ==


== See also ==
Cinema of Hong Kong


== References ==


== External links ==

Maggie Cheung at IMDb
Maggie Cheung's personal Xiaohongshu account