My Hero Academia (Japanese: 僕のヒーローアカデミア, Hepburn: Boku no Hīrō Akademia) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Kōhei Horikoshi. It was serialized in Shueisha's shōnen manga magazine Weekly Shōnen Jump from July 2014 to August 2024, with its chapters collected in 42 tankōbon volumes. Set in a world where superpowers (called "Quirks") have become commonplace, the story follows Izuku Midoriya, a boy who was born without a Quirk but still dreams of becoming a superhero himself. He is scouted by the world's greatest hero, All Might, who bestows his Quirk to Midoriya after recognizing his potential, and helps to enroll him in a prestigious high school for superheroes in training.
The manga spawned a media franchise, leading to numerous spin-off manga, such as My Hero Academia: Smash!!, My Hero Academia: Vigilantes, and My Hero Academia: Team-Up Missions. The series has also been expanded into light novels, stage plays, and various types of merchandise and media, including numerous video games. It has been adapted into an anime television series by Bones. The first season aired in Japan from April to June 2016, followed by a second season from April to September 2017, a third season from April to September 2018, a fourth season from October 2019 to April 2020, a fifth season from March to September 2021, a sixth season from October 2022 to March 2023, a seventh season from May to October 2024, and an eighth and final season which premiered in October 2025. It has also spawned four animated films, titled My Hero Academia: Two Heroes, My Hero Academia: Heroes Rising, My Hero Academia: World Heroes' Mission, and My Hero Academia: You're Next, as well as ten original video animations (OVAs). A live-action film by Legendary Entertainment is in development.
My Hero Academia became a commercial success and has appeared on The New York Times best-seller list several times. By April 2024, the manga had over 100 million copies in circulation, including sales of spin-offs, making it one of the best-selling manga series of all time. Critical reception has also been positive, with reviewers praising the manga for its art, characters, storytelling, action scenes, and its pop culture references to Western superhero comics; the anime series has received additional praise for its animation, music, pacing, action sequences, and voice acting in both Japanese and English. The manga has won several awards, including the Sugoi Japan Award and Harvey Award for Best Manga, and is considered one of the best of the 2010s. The anime has also received numerous awards and is considered one of the best of the 2010s as well.


== Synopsis ==


=== Setting ===
My Hero Academia is set in a world where about 80% of the human population has gained superpowers called "Quirks" (個性, Kosei) as a result of recent human evolution. Quirks vary widely and have the possibility of being genetically inherited, with the series' focal Quirk "One for All" being the only one that can be passed on without heritage. Most Quirks are generally small in scale, but some exhibit near god-like ability. Almost every Quirk has some sort of physical drawback, whether it be a usage limit or self-injury. Some Quirks also cause physical mutations to a person's body. Known as Mutants (異形, Igyō), people with these Quirks face discrimination and are given the pejorative "heteromorphs". The 20% of the population without Quirks, known as "Quirkless", also tend to get this treatment, albeit less severely. Quirks will generally manifest in an individual just after their toddler years. 
As Quirks became dominant among the population, society melded around their existence and largely commodified around them. Although the first case of a Quirk was in China, in the following years Japan emerged as the country with by far the highest percentage of Quirk population and strength, using this influence to become a superpower country. Despite this, other countries such as the United States also have heavy Quirk populations and influence.
Among the Quirk-enhanced individuals, a few of them earn the title of Heroes, who cooperate with authorities in rescue operations and apprehending criminals who abuse their Quirks, commonly known as Villains. Heroes work out of Hero Agencies, which serves as their base of operations and a means for them to operate a business from their heroics. There are two different kinds of Hero Agency structures: one in which there is a single Hero owning the agency who also employs lower-level heroes called Sidekicks, and another in which a group of heroes will own an agency together as a team. In addition, Heroes who excel in their duties gain celebrity status and are recognized as "Pro Heroes" (プロヒーロー, Puro Hīrō). Heroes are ranked in popularity via the Hero Billboard Charts, with higher ranking heroes receiving public appeal, although it is not uncommon for novice heroes to gain popularity as well. 
Pro Heroes begin their initial training in high school, of which U.A. High School in Shizuoka Prefecture, Japan is considered by far the most prestigious. In addition to regular schooling, students are taught different forms of hero training such as combat and rescue operations, as well as how to meld their individual skills and overcome their drawbacks. Companies will also sponsor the students, mainly by constructing, repairing, and remodeling superhero suits for them. They also take part in events to show their skills to the public, such as sports festivals and cultural festivals. These events also serve as a way for Pro Heroes to scout students to intern for them. While initially forbidden from heroic work, students will eventually partake in the Provisional Hero License Exam, which gives them a temporary amateur Hero License before they become fully registered.
There are two types of internships that offer the opportunity to become a Pro Hero. The first type is the Hero Agency Internship in which the Pro Heroes can send a request to students that wish to work under them, such as in the aftermath of the Sports Festival. It involves a student shadowing a Pro Hero, listening to their advice, and watching them in action for a week. The second type is the Hero Work-Study, where, after a student acquires a Hero License, they can apply to function as real sidekicks. This also allows them to gain experience and can help them get noticed by other Pro Heroes who might hire them as full-time sidekicks once they graduate.
Initially the people who volunteered to do their heroic duties without permission were recognized as "Vigilantes" (ヴィジランテ, Vijirante). Students who have acted as vigilantes are not allowed to work as heroes due to Quirk restriction laws managed by the Hero Public Safety Commission (ヒーロー公安委員会, Hīrō Kōan Iinkai). While the act of vigilantism is inherently illegal, the vigilantes themselves represent a moral gray area. The Hero Public Safety Commission originally enlisted vigilantes to do their dirty work until they became too organized for the vigilantes to properly deal with, so they abandoned the idea and instead focused on recruiting Pro Heroes. Some vigilantes wear costumes, but since they do not have access to support companies like heroes do, they are made out of regular clothes and everyday items.


=== Plot ===

Izuku "Deku" Midoriya is a Quirkless boy who, despite his lack of powers, dreams of becoming a Hero and attending U.A. High School, idolizing Japan's No. 1 Hero, All Might who also attended U.A. He is frequently picked on by others for this, particularly his childhood friend Katsuki Bakugo. One day, however, Deku attempts to save Bakugo from a villain, which is witnessed by All Might himself. Inspired by his natural heroism, the formerly Quirkless All Might chooses him to inherit his Quirk "One For All"—which gives him the ability to stockpile his raw power and pass it on to others—and become his successor. All Might was severely injured by his arch-nemesis All For One, whose Quirk allows him to steal other Quirks for his use and pass them over to others at his will, hastening the need for a successor. After nearly a year of physical training, Deku inherits One For All and passes the entrance exam to U.A. by saving Ochaco Uraraka. Deku, Ochaco, and Bakugo are among the twenty students placed in Class 1-A, where Deku's tenacity earns him several friends.
During one of their classes, Class 1-A encounters the League of Villains, led by All For One's apprentice Tomura Shigaraki. Shigaraki attempts to use an artificial being called a Nomu, which can stockpile different Quirks together, to kill All Might, but All Might overpowers the Nomu. Afterwards, Class 1-A takes part in a sports festival with the rest of their grade, where Deku comes into conflict with Shoto Todoroki, the son of the No. 2 Hero Endeavor who mistreated him and his family for years, leading Todoroki to resent him. As the festival progresses, Deku helps Todoroki accept his past and move on without resentment. As Bakugo wins the festival, 1-A's Class Representative Tenya Ida's older brother is crippled by Stain, a villain who believes most heroes only desire fame. 
The class goes on there Hero Agency internships, with Deku interning with Gran Torino, a former mentor of All Might's. During the internship, Ida finds Stain and attempts to get revenge. Though Ida is dispatched, Stain is ultimately defeated by Deku and Todoroki. Despite this, Stain's ideology spreads, and many of his believers join the League of Villains, including Dabi, Himiko Toga, and Twice. After the class finishes final exams, the League of Villains' recruits ambush Classes 1-A and 1-B while they are training at a summer camp, and kidnap Bakugo in the hopes of recruiting him. All Might leads several heroes in locating the League of Villains' hideout, where All For One reveals himself. Deku and some of his friends rescue Bakugo as All Might battles All For One. All For One is defeated and imprisoned, but All Might exhausts the last of One For All's power and retires. Endeavor, now the No. 1 Hero, is humbled by this added responsibility and begins trying to make amends with his family. 
The class partakes in their Provisional Hero License Exam, which Todoroki and Bakugo fail and leads to them needing to take remedial courses. In the aftermath, Bakugo deduces the secret of One For All but agrees to keep it hidden. Afterwards, Class 1-A meets with the "Big Three", U.A. High School's top-ranked seniors who select a few Class 1-A students to join them as interns; one of the Big Three, Mirio Togata selects Deku for an internship with All Might's former sidekick Sir Nighteye. Deku learns that Mirio was initially intended to be the next successor of One For All; despite this, Mirio takes a liking to Deku. Nighteye's team comes into conflict with the Shie Hassaikai, a yakuza group allied with the League of Villains who are experimenting on their boss's granddaughter Eri to synthesize a drug that suppresses Quirks. Nighteye leads his agency, alongside those of the other Big Three, in a raid Shie Hassaikai's facility to save Eri, during which Nighteye is killed and Mirio is de-powered. Eri is taken in by the U.A. staff, and Class 1-A performs a rock concert for her during the school culture festival.
During a battle exercise with Class 1-B, Deku begins to awaken all of the Quirks used by the previous users of One For All. He eventually continues his internship with Endeavor, alongside Bakugo and Todoroki. Meanwhile, the League of Villains defeats and merges with another villain group, the Meta Liberation Army, who seek Quirk equality, forming the Paranormal Liberation Front with Shigaraki as their commander. A war ensues where the pro and training heroes attempt to defeat the Paranormal Liberation Front; Twice is killed by the No. 2 hero Hawks, but most of the remaining top members escape, including Shigaraki, who now inherits All For One's Quirk and is possessed by him. Mirio is re-powered by Eri, and joins the heroes partway through the war. Ochaco develops sympathy for Toga after the latter interrogates her about Twice's death. Dabi reveals himself as the presumed-dead son of Endeavor, whose abuse led him to villainy, with in combination with the rampant destruction the heroes failed to stop shatters the public's trust in heroes. 
Thousands of imprisoned Villains break out, including the original All For One, causing Japan to descend into chaos. Believing his classmates are no longer be safe with the world knowing about One For All, Deku leaves U.A. to hunt for All For One with Japan's top heroes, using himself as bait in the process. However, this leads Deku to physical ruin, and All For One sends jaded former Hero Lady Nagant after him. After Deku defeats and makes amends with Nagant, Deku's classmates intervene and bring him back to U.A., which is now a refugee camp. Civilians protest Deku's return until Ochaco pleads to them that heroes need protection too.
After Deku recovers, Class 1-A student Yuga Aoyama is discovered to be a double agent for All For One and the one responsible for the first two League of Villains attacks. After reconciling with his class, the Heroes uses Aoyama's connection to lure the Paranormal Liberation Front into a trap that scatters them across the country for the remaining members to be defeated by the heroes. Toga transforms into Twice using a combination of her Quirk and Twice's blood and nearly kills Ochaco, but the two girls come to an understanding and Toga dies saving Ochaco's life through a fatal blood transfusion. The Todoroki family subdues Dabi after preventing his suicidal final attack. All For One attempts to reach Shigaraki's location and is stalled by many heroes, including All Might using a powered exoskeleton, before his original body is eventually killed by Bakugo. Shigaraki battles Deku and breaks free from All For One's control. Unable to defeat him physically, Deku forcefully transfers One For All to Shigaraki to damage him from within. All For One regains control, but is defeated by hero reinforcements; as the remnants of the past One For All wielders and Shigaraki rebel against him, Deku strikes the killing blow on both All For One and Shigaraki.
Eight years later, Deku has lost the power of One For All completely and is a hero course teacher at U.A., while his former classmates work as pro heroes or sidekicks. All Might gives Deku a powered suit of his own, funded by his former classmates, which he uses to return to hero work while continuing to teach at U.A. In the following months, Deku enters a relationship with Ochaco and becomes the No. 4 Hero.


== Production ==


=== Development ===
Writer Kōhei Horikoshi stated that after his previous series Barrage was canceled after just two volumes, he was depressed and out of ideas. To formulate more ideas, he revisited a one-shot he previously published in Akamaru Jump, titled My Hero (僕のヒーロー, Boku no Hīrō). This would end up being the basis for My Hero Academia. Horikoshi was also an avid fan of American films and comics, such as Sam Raimi's Spider-Man trilogy, Star Wars, and X-Men, which he used for inspiration. Horikoshi cites Masashi Kishimoto's Naruto manga series as being the main influence for his art, specifically stating it gave him a love for drawing hands. Horikoshi has also cited Dragon Ball, Ultraman, and Kamen Rider as sources of inspiration. Additionally, Horikoshi noted that he is a fan of the kaiju franchises Gamera and Godzilla and has mentioned and made reference to them in several comments.
Hitoshi Koike, the editor of My Hero Academia, said that Horikoshi already had a general story in mind for the manga. However, he also noted there were many rejected story ideas, and that Horikoshi dismissed some ideas himself. Koike also stated that Horikoshi liked to use his inspirations. Koike additionally noted My Hero Academia's first three chapters took longer to complete than many other new serialized works. Koike and Horikoshi worked on character design concepts while finishing the storyboards; Koike felt excited about the characters' designs despite not knowing their role in the plot.
Kengo Monji, the second editor of the manga, said Horikoshi had a difficult time writing chapters at first. Monji felt that the manga was mixing the flair of Japan's shōnen manga with "heroes", a concept that he thought was understandable to a wide audience. Monji also complimented Horikoshi's artwork, noting its cartoon-style.


=== Conclusion ===
Horikoshi originally stated that My Hero Academia would not be as long as One Piece since he felt he did not have enough stamina; he instead preferred to keep it concise in comparison to other shōnen manga series. In April 2021, Horikoshi stated that the series had continued for longer than expected, but that it was still leading toward the ending that he had decided upon before the series began. In December 2021, he stated during an interview at Jump Festa '22 that "if things go smoothly, the manga will meet its goal to end in one year. If it doesn't go smoothly, I think [Izuku's voice actor] Yamashita will be reading out the exact same letter from me at next year's Jump Festa." He also teased that Katsuki Bakugo would soon get a "big scene". Horikoshi wrote in the 34th volume of the manga that "I feel like I can finally see the goal in sight. It's a rather strange feeling getting to this point. In the past, I would just be drawing without a single care [for the future], but now I wonder just how many more times can I draw these characters? Change is scary as you grow older. Well, I really shouldn't dwell on that! Until next volume then!". In October 2022, the author rescinded the statement he made during Jump Festa '22, opting to take longer to complete the manga's final arc than initially expected.
In December 2022, although Horikoshi stated that his estimations were wrong, he said that the ending of the manga is "very close". In December 2023, he reiterated on what he said in the previous year's event. However, he added that there were still many things he wanted to draw beyond the battle that was currently ongoing in the manga. The author also jokingly said that "if the series continues until next year's Jump Festa, we will hold a Dogeza Festival on the stage." In June 2024, Shueisha announced in the year's 27th issue of Weekly Shōnen Jump that the manga had entered its "epilogue" with the 424th chapter. Horikoshi stated in his comment that although the conclusion of a story is usually short, it is not the kind of manga to end immediately after defeating the villain, and so it will go on "a little longer," and he added that the manga would "return to its title." Later in the same month, it was announced that the series would end in five chapters after a ten-year run on August 5, 2024. The author expressed gratitude to his fans that made it possible for him to draw Deku and the others for the past ten years.


=== Anime adaptation ===
My Hero Academia producer Wakana Okamura, who previously worked with animation studio Bones on Blood Blockade Battlefront, stated in an interview that he chose to work with Bones on adapting the series because he felt they would make it a "high-quality production" with a "wide reach [both] internationally and domestically". Okamura also stated the production staff, especially character designer Yoshihiko Umakoshi, were fans of the manga. Director Kenji Nagasaki said Bones wanted to "make [the series] with a strong core and backbones". Yōsuke Kuroda said he was a fan of the series prior to its anime adaptation, so he quickly accepted when offered to do the screenwriting.
For the casting, Weekly Shōnen Jump magazine announced that the anime would be starring Daiki Yamashita as Izuku Midoriya, Kenta Miyake as All Might, Nobuhiko Okamoto as Katsuki Bakugo, Ayane Sakura as Ochaco Uraraka, Kaito Ishikawa as Tenya Iida, Aoi Yūki as Tsuyu Asui, Ryō Hirohashi as Minoru Mineta, Marina Inoue as Momo Yaoyorozu, and Yoshimasa Hosoya as Fumikage Tokoyami. In February 2016, Tasuku Hatanaka, Toshiki Masuda and Yuki Kaji joined the cast as Denki Kaminari, Eijirō Kirishima and Shōto Todoroki, respectively. In an interview with Justin Briner and Christopher Sabat, they expressed interest about the English dub in Funimation. Briner, the voice of Izuku, said the dubbing process was more consistent, but also said it felt strange to do it on a regular home video release. Sabat, who voices All Might, felt that even the actors and director were continuing the show without knowing the full story because they had not yet been told what the story was.
During the production for the anime's second season, Umakoshi was impressed by Horikoshi's designs, feeling they were very well-suited for animation. He also stated that in terms of giving the characters more life and movement, all they basically did was simplify the dialogue. He believed that the manga already had a lot of movement before animating. Regarding the fight between Todoroki and Izuku, Umakoshi believed that he was able to develop a story that could not fail by considering which part of the story would be handled by which key animation, and by choosing someone with a high level of skill. He identified certain things and collated who would work best in other parts of the scene. After the airing of an episode, Umakoshi felt that the anime had a great response not only from fans of the manga but also from regular Japanese viewers.
Umakoshi was also looking forward not only the development of the relationship between Deku and All Might, but also between Deku and Bakugo in the future material of the manga, which had not been animated yet. Unlike the other Shonen Jump adaptation titles such as Naruto and One Piece, where the staff worked throughout the year, Umakoshi said the production cycle of My Hero Academia is split into batches. He also said: "Personally, it would be best if I could be working on it continuously, throughout a whole year. But in reality, sometimes it doesn't work out that way, due to different aspects of business and things. But in reality, the schedule did line up so that we worked on the second season right after the first season ended, so I have been working on it somewhat continuously, even if the delivery of the product comes in batches."


=== Themes and analysis ===
Horikoshi has stated that the main theme he focuses on is "what makes a hero". He also stated that he likes stories with bad endings, as well as horror stories. However, he finds these difficult to draw since the mood in his stories is based on his own current mood. To combat this, he adds in more silly-looking characters such as Fat Gum, in order to keep the mood up.
The series explores themes such as the nature of heroism, the importance of perseverance and determination, and the power of friendship and teamwork. Horikoshi said that he was inspired by the idea of creating a world where anyone, regardless of their background or abilities, could become a hero. He wanted to show that even those without powers could still make a difference and achieve their dreams through hard work and determination. That vision results in heroes in the series not being egotistical, but passionate and dedicated individuals with clear goals to work towards. The series also explores Izuku's idolization of heroes from a young age and his enthusiasm. In a world where superheroes are not just regulated, but commercialized brands, he still sees something inspiring in their actions.
My Hero Academia has been noted for its positive view of heroes. Cramer wrote that "in the modern world, we often challenge heroic ideals, and the motivations of the people who pursue them", noting how in American media, the optimism of the Silver Age of Comic Books lead to post-Watchmen ambiguity. He also noted that, even in Japan, unquestioned heroism is often challenged in modern revisions of older series, such as in Yatterman and Gatchaman.


== Media ==


=== Manga ===

Written and illustrated by Kōhei Horikoshi, My Hero Academia began its serialization in Shueisha's shōnen manga magazine Weekly Shōnen Jump on July 7, 2014. The series ended after a ten-year run on August 5, 2024. Its chapters were collected and published by Shueisha into 42 individual tankōbon volumes, released from November 4, 2014, to December 4, 2024; the final volume includes 38 pages of new content that take place after the original ending.
The series is licensed for English-language release in North America by Viz Media, which published the first volume on August 4, 2015. As the series was published in Japan, it was also released simultaneously in English digitally by Viz Media's Weekly Shonen Jump and later its website. Shueisha began to simulpublish the series in English on the website and Manga Plus app in January 2019.


==== Spin-offs ====

Three spin-off manga series have also been released. The first, My Hero Academia: Smash!! by Hirofumi Neda, is a comedy manga which ran in the Shōnen Jump+ digital app from November 9, 2015, to November 6, 2017. Its chapters were collected in five tankōbon volumes. The second spin-off manga, My Hero Academia: Vigilantes, is a prequel to the main series written by Hideyuki Furuhashi and illustrated by Betten Court, which ran from August 20, 2016, to May 28, 2022. Its chapters were collected in 15 tankōbon volumes. The third spin-off manga, My Hero Academia: Team-Up Missions by Yōkō Akiyama, features various side stories. It began serialization in Saikyō Jump on August 2, 2019, with a prologue chapter debuting in Jump GIGA on July 25, 2019; the series ended on January 4, 2025. The three spin-off manga were licensed for the English-language release in North America by Viz Media.
The four series' films have been adapted into one-volume manga series by Homesha. A 15-page one-shot spin-off manga, illustrated by Yōkō Akiyama, centered on Melissa, titled Everyone Is Surely Someone's Hero (きっと誰もが誰かのヒーロー, Kitto Daremo ga Dareka no Hero), was published in the 35th issue of Shueisha's Weekly Shōnen Jump on July 30, 2018. A one-shot spin-off manga that serves as a prequel to the first film, written and illustrated by Kōhei Horikoshi, centered on All Might's past and the featured character Nana Shimura, titled No. 0 All Might: Rising (No.0 オールマイト：ライジング, Nanbā 0 Ōru Maito: Raijingu), was given to the first one million attendees on August 3, 2018. A ten-page manga was included in the My Hero Academia Two Heroes Vol. 0 Origin (僕のヒーローアカデミア２人の英雄 Vol.0 Origin, Boku no Hīrō Akademia 2-ri no Eiyū Vol. 0 Origin) book. It was later published in English by Viz Media in September 2018.
Deku & Bakugo: Rising (出久&爆豪:ライジング, Deku Ando Bakugo: Raijingu), a two-chapter spin-off manga illustrated by Akiyama, was published in Shueisha's Weekly Shōnen Jump on December 16 and 23, 2019. It centered on Izuku Midoriya and Katsuki Bakugo during their second year in middle school. A one-shot spin-off manga that serves as a prequel to the second film, written and illustrated by Horikoshi, centered on Nine, titled League of Villains: Undercover (ヴィランれんごう:アンダーカバー, Viran Rengō: Andākabā), was also given to the first million attendees on December 20, 2019. A nine-page manga was included in the My Hero Academia Heroes: Rising Vol. R (僕のヒーローアカデミア ヒーローズ：ライジング Vol.R, Boku no Hīrō Akademia Hīrōzu: Raijingu Vol. R) book. It was later published in English by Viz Media in March 2020.
A 17-page special one-shot chapter written and illustrated by Akiyama, titled My Hero Academia Tokubetsu Spinoff: Endeavor's Mission (僕のヒーローアカデミア 特別スピンオフ エンデヴァーズ ミッション, Boku no Hīrō Akademia Tokubetsu Supin'ofu Endevāzu Misshon), was published in Weekly Shōnen Jump on August 2, 2021. It centered on Endeavor and his trainees Izuku, Katsuki, and Shoto during their Hero Work-Studies at the Endeavor Agency. An 80-page manga booklet, titled My Hero Academia World Heroes' Mission Vol. W (僕のヒーローアカデミア ワールドヒーローズミッション Vol. W, Boku no Hīrō Akademia Wārudo Hīrōzu Misshon Vol. W), includes a nine-page one-shot manga that serves as a prequel to the third film, centered on Endeavor Agency trainees and the featured character Hawks, titled No. XXX Hawks: Soothe (No.XXX ホークス:スーズ, Nanbā XXX Hōkusu: Sūzu) was given to the My Hero Academia: World Heroes' Mission attendees who viewed the film in Japan on August 6, 2021. The manga volume had a limited print run of one million copies. In October 2021, a 76-page booklet featuring a specialty manga was also given to the attendees who saw it on the opening weekend in the United States.
A 16-page one-shot spin-off chapter written and illustrated by Akiyama, titled Connect to the Day, was published in Weekly Shōnen Jump on July 29, 2024. It takes place before the Final War, centered on Class 1-A students during their mission to capture the Jailbreakers. An 80-page manga booklet, titled My Hero Academia Vol. Next (僕のヒーローアカデミア Vol. Next, Boku no Hīrō Akademia Vol. Nekusuto), includes a seven-page one-shot manga that serves as a prequel to the fourth film, centered on Class 1-A students, titled A Piece of Cake, was given to the My Hero Academia: You're Next attendees who viewed the film in Japan on August 2, 2024. The manga volume had a limited print run of 1.5 million copies. The manga chapter was later published in English by Viz Media in October 2024.


=== Anime ===

On October 29, 2015, the series' official website announced that the manga would receive an anime television series adaptation produced by Bones. The anime is directed by Kenji Nagasaki, written by Yōsuke Kuroda, and features character designs by Yoshihiko Umakoshi. The series' first season aired from April 3 to June 26, 2016, on all JNN affiliate stations, including TBS and MBS. A second season was announced in Weekly Shōnen Jump magazine's 30th issue of 2016. The season aired from April 1 to September 30, 2017, on all NNS affiliate stations, including YTV and NTV, with the staff and cast from the first season reprising their roles. A third season was announced in the 44th issue of Weekly Shōnen Jump magazine of 2017, which aired from April 7 to September 29, 2018.
A fourth season was announced in the final episode of season three. On December 19 of the same year, the series' official website confirmed a new key visual, along with its release date of October 12, 2019, which aired until April 4, 2020. Funimation premiered the first episode of the fourth season at Anime Expo on July 6, 2019 with the English dub. Kenji Nagasaki served as chief director of the fourth season, with Masahiro Mukai as director. A fifth season was announced at the end of the final episode of season four, which aired from March 27 to September 25, 2021.
A sixth season was announced at the end of the fifth season's final episode. On July 24, 2022, the Hero Fes event confirmed a new visual, as well as its release date of October 1, 2022, which ran for two consecutive cours that aired until March 25, 2023; it adapted the manga's "Paranormal Liberation War" and "Dark Hero" story arcs. A seventh season was announced at the end of the sixth season's final episode, which aired from May 4 to October 12, 2024, with four "Memories" recap specials having aired in the preceding month of April. Naomi Nakayama served as the director of the seventh season.
An eighth and final season was announced at the end of the seventh season's final episode. In July 2025, Kōhei Horikoshi was confirmed to being heavily involved in the production, and would provide the new original scenes that were not included in the manga. The season premiered on October 4, 2025. The series finale is scheduled to premiere on December 13 of the same year.


==== Original video animations ====

An original video animation (OVA) based on the anime series was shown at the Jump Festa '16 event on November 27, 2016. Titled "Save! Rescue Training!", it was bundled with the limited edition of the 13th volume of the manga, which released on April 4, 2017. It was later released on DVD releases alongside Black Clover and Food Wars!: Shokugeki no Soma bundled with the future volumes of their respective manga, as it was announced on Jump Special Anime Festa event. A second OVA, titled "Training of the Dead," bundled with a limited edition of the 14th volume of the manga, released on June 2, 2017. It focuses on a joint practice session between Izuku's class and the other hero department students at U.A. Academy. A third OVA, "All Might: Rising," was released on February 13, 2019. It was bundled with the first film's Blu-ray set, and adapted its prequel manga. It was two minutes long.
A two-part original net animation (ONA) titled "Make It! Do-or-Die Survival Training," were released on August 16, 2020, with the returning staff and cast from season 4. Funimation streamed them simultaneously with the Japanese release. An OVA based on the bonus manga chapter "Departure" was included with the "Plus Ultra" edition of My Hero Academia: World Heroes' Mission in Japan. Two new OVA episodes, titled "HLB <Hero League Baseball>" and "Laugh! As If You Are in Hell," were given screenings in Japan from June 16–19, 2022. Internationally, Crunchyroll premiered the episodes at Anime Expo on July 1, 2022. A worldwide streaming release premiered on August 1, 2022.
A special OVA episode, titled "UA Heroes Battle," premiered with an English dub at the New York Comic Con on October 13, 2023. The episode has given screenings in Japan from October 20–26, 2023. Crunchyroll streamed it with English subtitles and dub on November 30 of the same year. An OVA based on the bonus manga chapter "A Piece of Cake" was included with the deluxe "Plus Ultra" edition of My Hero Academia: You're Next in Japan.


==== International release ====
In March 2016, Funimation announced they had licensed the international rights for streaming services, the home and broadcast release, and the merchandise rights. Universal Pictures UK distributed the first season in the United Kingdom and Ireland on behalf of Funimation, with Sony Pictures UK distributing the second season for Funimation, and Manga Entertainment distributing subsequent seasons for Funimation. In Australia and New Zealand, Universal Sony Pictures Home Entertainment distributed the first two seasons, on behalf of Funimation, with Madman Anime distributing season 3 onwards, in partnership with Funimation. On April 19, 2018, Funimation announced that the series would air on Adult Swim's Toonami block starting on May 5, 2018. Medialink licensed the series in Southeast Asia. They aired it simultaneously on Animax Asia. In August 2023, Cartoon Network announced that the series would air in India starting on September 10, 2023. The first two seasons of the series aired on AXS TV in the United States English dubbed from February 20 to October 3, 2025, as part of Web3 company Azuki's short-lived Anime.com Hour programming block.


==== Music ====

The original music of the series is composed by Yuki Hayashi. The series has also used twenty-four different theme songs: twelve opening themes and twelve ending themes. The opening theme "The Day", performed by Porno Graffitti, and the ending theme "Heroes", performed by Brian the Sun, were used for the 13 episodes in the first season. For the second season, the first opening theme is "Peace Sign" (ピースサイン) performed by Kenshi Yonezu and the first ending theme is "Dakara, Hitori ja nai" (だから、ひとりじゃない, Therefore, I am not Alone) performed by Little Glee Monster for the first 13 episodes; from episode 14 onwards, the opening theme is "Sora ni Utaeba" (空に歌えば, Singin' to the Sky) performed by amazarashi and the ending theme is "Datte Atashi no Hīrō" (だってアタシのヒーロー, Still My Hero) performed by LiSA. For the first 13 episodes of the third season, the opening theme is "Odd Future" by Uverworld, while the ending theme is "Update" (アップデート) by miwa. For the rest of the season, the opening theme is "Make my story" by Lenny code fiction and the ending theme is "Long Hope Philia" (ロングホープ・フィリア) by Masaki Suda. For the first 14 episodes of the fourth season, the opening theme is "Polaris" (ポラリス) by Blue Encount, while the ending theme is "Kōkai no Uta" (航海の唄, The Song of the Voyage) by Sayuri. For the rest of the season, the opening theme is "Starmarker" (スターマーカー) by Kana-Boon and the ending theme is "Shout Baby" by Ryokuōshoku Shakai. Kyoka Jiro starring Chrissy Costanza performs the insert songs "Each Goal" in episode 19 and "Hero too" in episode 23, with the former insert song was uncredited, while the latter insert song was credited as the U.A. School Festival track.
For the first 13 episodes of the fifth season, the opening theme is "No.1" by Dish, while the ending theme is "Ashiato" (足跡; lit. 'Footprints') by the Peggies. From episode 14 onwards, the opening theme is "Merry-Go-Round" by Man with a Mission, while the ending theme is "Uso ja Nai" (嘘じゃない; lit. 'Not a Lie') by Soshi Sakiyama. For the first 13 episodes of the sixth season, the opening theme is "Hitamuki" (ひたむき; lit. 'Single-Minded') by Super Beaver, while the ending theme is "Sketch" by Kiro Akiyama. From episode 14 onwards, the opening theme is "Bokurano" (ぼくらの; lit. 'Our') by Eve, while the ending theme is "Kitakaze" (キタカゼ; lit. 'North Wind') by Six Lounge. For the first nine episodes of the seventh season, the opening theme is "Tagatame" (誰我為; lit. 'For Someone's Sake') by TK from Ling Tosite Sigure and the ending theme is "Tsubomi" (蕾; lit. 'Flower Bud') by Omoinotake. From episode ten onwards, the opening theme is "Curtain Call" (カーテンコール) by Yuuri, while the ending theme is "Rokutōsei" (六等星; lit. 'Class 6 Star') by Zarame. For the eighth and final season, the opening theme is "The Revo" by Porno Graffitti, who previously provided the opening theme song "The Day" from the first season, and the ending theme is "I" by Bump of Chicken.
In November 2021, a concert event titled My Hero Academia Official Live Concert was held in Manhattan. Another concert event, titled My Hero Academia Special Film Concert, was held at Arena Tachikawa Tachihi on November 23, 2023. A two-day Plus Ultra concert event featuring the artists and bands from the series, titled ANI-ROCK FES. 2024 My Hero Academia PLUS ULTRA LIVE, was held on February 24 and 25, 2024 at Yokohama Arena.


=== Light novels ===
A light novel series, titled My Hero Academia: School Briefs (僕のヒーローアカデミア 雄英白書, Boku no Hīrō Akademia Yūei Hakusho), written by Anri Yoshi, was released by Shueisha under its Jump J-Books imprint. It centers on Izuku Midoriya and his classmates of U.A. High in everyday school lives. The first volume was released on April 4, 2016. As of October 4, 2021, six volumes have been published. In North America, it has been licensed in English by Viz Media.
Light novels based on the four anime films were released on August 3, 2018, December 20, 2019, August 6, 2021, and August 2, 2024, also written by Anri Yoshi.


=== Theatrical films ===


==== Anime ====

An anime film was announced in December 2017 and features an original story set after the manga's "Final Exam" arc. Titled My Hero Academia: Two Heroes, the film had its world premiere at Anime Expo in Los Angeles on July 5, 2018, before a Japanese theatrical release on August 3, 2018, with the staff and cast from the anime series reprising their roles. The film has grossed over $33 million worldwide, and ended its theatrical run with $5.8 million to become the tenth highest-grossing animated film in the United States and Canada at that time.
On March 23, 2019, it was announced that a second animated film for the series was in production. On July 7, 2019, the official Twitter account for My Hero Academia revealed the title as My Hero Academia: Heroes Rising; the film was released in Japan on December 20, 2019. The film takes place after the manga's "Meta Liberation Army" arc. It contains story elements that were once going to be used by Kōhei Horikoshi in the series finale. It was released in North America on February 26, 2020. The film has grossed $30 million worldwide, and surpassed My Hero Academia: Two Heroes during its ninth domestic gross weekend.
On November 29, 2020, it was announced that a third animated film for the series was in production. The staff and cast from the previous two films reprised their roles. In the first episode of the series' fifth season, the film was revealed to be titled My Hero Academia: World Heroes' Mission. The film was released in Japan on August 6, 2021, and premiered in the United States and Canada on October 29, 2021. The film has grossed over $47 million worldwide, and became the tenth highest-grossing domestic film of 2021 in Japan.
A fourth animated film was announced on August 6, 2023, taking place after the manga's "U.A. Traitor" arc. On January 29, 2024, the film was revealed to be titled My Hero Academia: You're Next. It was released in Japan on August 2, 2024, and began screening in the United States on October 11, 2024. The film has grossed over $32 million worldwide, and surpassed My Hero Academia: World Heroes' Mission as the highest-grossing film of the franchise during its tenth weekend. It also became the tenth highest-grossing domestic film of 2024 in Japan.


==== Live action ====
In October 2018, Legendary Entertainment acquired the rights to produce a live action adaptation of the series. In August 2021, it was revealed to be directed by Shinsuke Sato, with Alex Garcia and Jay Ashenfelter overseeing the adaptation, and Ryosuke Yoritomi representing the manga publisher Shueisha. Toho is set to distribute the film in Japan. On December 12, 2022, Netflix announced that they had acquired the rights to the film with Joby Harold as screenwriter. On September 9, 2025, it was announced that Jason Fuchs had been hired to rewrite the script and that Sato had been reaffirmed as director.


=== Video games ===


==== Console games ====

A video game based on the anime, My Hero Academia: Battle for All (僕のヒーローアカデミア バトル・フォー・オール, Boku no Hīrō Akademia Batoru fō Ōru), was announced in November 2015. The game was developed by Dimps and published by Bandai Namco Entertainment for the Nintendo 3DS, where it released in Japan on May 19, 2016.
My Hero Academia has also received four video games developed by Byking and published by Bandai Namco Entertainment. The first, titled My Hero One's Justice (僕のヒーローアカデミア One's Justice(ワンズ ジャスティス), Boku no Hīrō Akademia: Wanzu Jasutisu), was released for PlayStation 4, Nintendo Switch, Windows, and Xbox One on October 26, 2018. The game has sold over 500,000 units worldwide by January 2019. A sequel, My Hero One's Justice 2 (僕のヒーローアカデミア One's Justice(ワンズ ジャスティス)2, Boku no Hīrō Akademia Wanzu Jasutisu Tsū), was released on Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, Windows, and Xbox One on March 12, 2020, in Japan and worldwide in the following day. The third, a free-to-play battle royale action game, titled My Hero Ultra Rumble (僕のヒーローアカデミア ULTRA RUMBLE(ウルトラ ランブル), Boku no Hīrō Akademia Urutora Ranburu), was released for Nintendo Switch, PlayStation 4, Windows and Xbox One on September 28, 2023. The fourth, a sequel to One's Justice 2 titled My Hero Academia: All's Justice, is set to be released on PlayStation 5, Windows, and Xbox Series X/S on February 5, 2026, in Japan and worldwide in the following day.


==== Mobile games ====
Three mobile games have been released for iOS and Android. My Hero Academia: The Strongest Hero was released in North America and several other mostly English-speaking countries in late May 2021. My Hero Ultra Impact (僕のヒーローアカデミア ULTRA IMPACT(ウルトラ インパクト), Boku no Hīrō Akademia Urutora Inpakuto) was released in February 2022.


==== Crossovers ====
Izuku Midoriya, All Might, Katsuki Bakugo, and Shoto Todoroki appeared as playable characters in the 2018 crossover fighting game Jump Force. Izuku Midoriya, Katsuki Bakugo, Ochaco Uraraka, All Might, Shoto Todoroki, Eijiro Kirishima, Mina Ashido, and the members of League of Villains appeared as cosmetic outfits for players to purchase in Fortnite. Additionally, the in-game abilities including "Deku's Smash" and "Todoroki's Ice Wall" were introduced. In December 2023, a Roblox game based on the anime, My Hero Academia: Battlegrounds, was produced by Gamefam in collaboration with Crunchyroll and Toho; and in September 2025, its second game My Hero Academia: Ultimate was also developed by Gamefam in collaboration with Crunchyroll. Izuku and Katsuki were featured as playable characters in the Granblue Fantasy collaboration event from January 12–25, 2024. A collaboration with Overwatch 2 became available from October 17–30, 2024. The outfit skins featured Tracer as Deku, Juno as Uravity, Reinhardt as All Might, Kiriko as Himiko Toga, and Reaper as Tomura Shigaraki.


=== Stage plays ===
My Hero Academia: The "Ultra" Stage, a stage play adaptation, was first announced in 2018 and ran from April 12–21 and April 26–29, 2019. The play was directed by Tsuneyasu Motoyoshi, written by Hideyuki Nishimori, and choreographed by Umebō. Shunsuke Wada composed the music. The cast includes Shin Tamura as Izuku Midoriya, Ryōta Kobayashi as Katsuki Bakugo, Yume Takuchi as Ochako Uraraka, Hiroki Ino as Tenya Iida, and Ryō Kitamura as Shoto Todoroki.
A second stage play adaptation, titled My Hero Academia: The "Ultra" Stage: A True Hero, was scheduled to run from March 6–22 and March 27 – April 5, 2020, with the cast and staff returning. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, My Hero Academia: The "Ultra" Stage: A True Hero's original run was canceled and postponed to July 2020, where a complete version, titled My Hero Academia: The "Ultra" Stage: A True Hero Plus Stage Ver., ran instead. After one staff member contracted COVID-19, the production committee announced that My Hero Academia: The "Ultra" Stage: A True Hero would instead be live-streamed; however, the play was delayed again after another staff member contracted COVID-19. The stage play ran in 2021 from December 3–12 and December 24–26.
A third stage play adaptation titled My Hero Academia The "Ultra" Stage: The Symbol of Peace was announced on December 26, 2021, and was scheduled to run from April 9–10, April 22–24, and April 29 – May 8, 2022. However, due to one of the actor's injury during a performance of the play, future performances were postponed.
A fourth stage play adaptation, titled My Hero Academia: The "Ultra" Stage: The Best Hero, was announced at the Jump Festa '23 event in December 2022. It ran from April 29 – May 7, May 12–14, and May 19–21, 2023.


=== Art and guidebooks ===
Two My Hero Academia art books and three guidebooks have been released by Shueisha. The first art book, titled My Hero Academia: Official Character Guide Ultra Archive Art Book (僕のヒーローアカデミア 公式キャラクターガイド ウルトラアーカイブ画集, Boku no Hīrō Akademia Kōshiki Kyarakutā Gaido Urutora Ākaibu Gashū), was released on May 7, 2016. The first guidebook, titled My Hero Academia: Ultra Archive - The Official Character Guide, was published on May 2, 2016. Accompanying the anime, the second guidebook, titled My Hero Academia: Ultimate Animation – The Official Book Guide, was released on September 4, 2017. The third guidebook, titled My Hero Academia: Ultra Analysis – The Official Character Guide, was released on October 4, 2019. The second and final artbook, titled My Hero Academia: Official Illustration Collection Ultra Artworks, was released on June 4, 2025.


=== Other media ===
A drama CD titled My Hero Academia: Sweep! Local Area Cleaning! (僕のヒーローアカデミアハケ！ちいきせいそう！, Boku no Hīrō Akademia Hake! Chiiki Seisou!) bundled with a limited edition of the seventh volume of the manga, released before the anime. Kōhei Horikoshi provides the original story and supervised the project, and the script is written by Yōsuke Kuroda who also wrote for the anime series. An interactive puzzle-solving event called "Heroes Dead End Program" was held on July 29 and 30, 2017. An exhibit of the series ran in Tokyo's Ikebukuro Sunshine City from September 30 to October 8, 2018.
An art exhibition, titled "My Hero Academia Drawing Smash", ran in Tokyo from April 23 to June 27, 2021, and in Osaka from July 16 to September 5, 2021. An animation exhibition with a theme of Heroes vs. Villains, titled My Hero Academia Anime: All-Out War Arc Exhibition, ran in various cities in Japan from April to November 2023. Another animation exhibition, titled My Hero Academia Ultra Animation Exhibition, ran in Tokyo and Osaka from December 2023 to March 2024. Another art exhibition, to celebrate the series' ten-year run, was held at Creative Museum Tokyo from June 21 to August 31, 2025. It is set to be held at the Namba Parks Museum in Osaka from October 25 to December 21 of the same year, and in Fukuoka on Q2 2026.
From March 1 to August 14, 2024, Universal Studios Japan hosted an attraction based on the series, as part of the "Cool Japan" program. My Hero Academia The Real 4-D attraction uses 3D visuals and special effects such as seat rumbles and splashes of water. It also includes an original story featuring Deku, Bakugo, Uraraka, and Todoroki facing off against a villain who appears at the concert of a world-famous rock performer. A live-action short film titled "Succession", commemorating the manga's tenth anniversary, released its video on YTV Animation's YouTube channel on April 27, 2024. It follows the lives of two brothers who grew up together with the manga series using its iconic quotes.
A global popularity poll titled "World Best Hero", commemorating the manga's ten-year run, was announced on August 5, 2024. The poll advertisement was published in the International edition of The New York Times on August 6. It is the first manga that Shueisha hosted a worldwide character popularity poll. The voting opened till September 30, with the winner on December 3 would get a statue designed by Horikoshi. A fanbook titled My Hero Academia: Final Fan Book Ultra Age, to celebrate the manga's completion, was released on May 2, 2025. It includes the detailed information about the characters, setting, quirks, and special moves. It also features an interview with the past editors, a Q&A corner with Horikoshi, and an exclusive short one-shot manga.


== Reception ==


=== Popularity ===
My Hero Academia ranked second on the "Nationwide Bookstore Employees' Recommended Comics of 2015" poll by Honya Club online bookstore. The series has been ranked on the "Book of the Year" list from Media Factory's Da Vinci magazine, where professional book reviewers, bookstore employees, and Da Vinci readers participate; it ranked 26th in 2015; 22nd in 2016; 16th in 2018; 37th in 2019; 41st in 2020; 34th in 2021; 22nd in 2022; and 19th in 2024. On Takarajimasha's Kono Manga ga Sugoi! ranking of the top 20 manga for male readers, it ranked fifth on the 2016 list. On TV Asahi's Manga Sōsenkyo 2021 poll, in which 150,000 people voted for their top 100 manga series, My Hero Academia ranked 16th. On a 2021 survey conducted by Line Research asking Japanese high school students what manga series they are currently into, the series ranked second among boys.
The story has been noted to take inspiration from elements in American superhero comics, such as the aesthetics of its characters, and due to the popularity of the series, characters of My Hero Academia were used to promote the Marvel Studios films Avengers: Infinity War and Captain America: Brave New World. Before the anime adaptation's premiere, Naruto's creator Masashi Kishimoto praised Kōhei Horikoshi's work, and said: "My Hero Academia is finally getting animated! Congratulations! To put into words this sensation, which I know firsthand... it's probably a great feeling. [Considering] the original work and the studio, Bones... you don't need the 'probably,' it's a great feeling. People who know it will get it! Internationally, even... in any case, it's a great feeling. It's the same feeling I had when my work was first animated – no, [the series] is more than that! And they aren't making me say this, it's the truth." Kishimoto also believed that it would be a success overseas. One Piece creator Eiichiro Oda also praised the series. After the manga's completion, writers, editors, the anime's staff and cast, and stage play actors expressed congratulations to Horikoshi for his work.
My Hero Academia was popular with Japanese readers of Charapedia, who voted it the fourth best anime show of Q2 2017. The anime received high TV ratings and has consistently ranked among the top ten animated shows in Japan since the release of its second season. The official music video of the second season's opening theme song, "Peace Sign" by Kenshi Yonezu, reached 48.6 million views on YouTube, becoming one of the top trending videos of 2017. In the United States, My Hero Academia was the second most "in-demand" TV title in the last 60 days in 2020 according to Observer, which tracks popularity through social media, fan ratings, and piracy. In January 2021, it was revealed that the series was the fourth most-watched anime series on Crunchyroll in 2020, being watched in 23 countries and territories, including North America, Central America, South America, and Europe. In April of the same year, the fifth season of the series set the record for the most-watched premiere of any series on MyAnimeList, surpassing other anime titles such as Attack on Titan: The Final Season, The Promised Neverland season 2, and Dr. Stone: Stone Wars.
According to Video Research, the premiere of its sixth season earned a television rating of 3.9% (an improvement from the previous season's 3.2%) and ranked as the fourth-most watched anime, outperforming other popular series such as One Piece, Spy × Family, and Doraemon in the average household viewership in Japan. The sixth season's fifth episode became one of the most-watched episodes of the series, garnering over 3.01 million viewers across 2.26 million households. Additionally, more than 2.64 million people who watched the anime, was an increase of 325,000 viewers from its season premiere, which had an individual viewership rating of 2.1%. By December 22, 2022, the series ranked as the fifth "Most-Watched Anime in Japan" for December 2022. The sixth season's finale averaged 2.01 million viewers on television after its broadcast.
The series' characters have also been highly popular for cosplaying, especially in Japan, where a poll surveyed by Cosplayers Archive ranked My Hero Academia ninth in Q3 2017. According to the retailer Zavvi, where they surveyed Instagram hashtags containing franchise names followed by the term "cosplay", My Hero Academia was the most popular franchise among cosplayers worldwide with 2,377,476 posts, ranking above companies and franchises such as DC Comics, Marvel, Disney, Star Wars, Naruto, Attack on Titan, Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba, Pokémon, and Sailor Moon. The retailer stated that the result demonstrates the "recent growth of anime". They also surveyed hashtags containing character names, where three My Hero Academia characters placed in the top ten rankings: Izuku ranked fifth with 224,429 posts, Shoto came at seventh with 177,161 posts, and Katsuki at ninth with 147,600 posts.
On Tumblr's Year in Review, which highlights the largest communities, fandoms, and trends on the platform throughout the year, My Hero Academia ranked first in the Top Anime & Manga Shows category from 2018 to 2021. The characters also placed highly in the rankings of the Top Anime & Manga Characters category. In 2019, Izuku Midoriya ranked first, with 17 other spots being occupied by other My Hero Academia characters in the top 50 list; seven were ranked on the top 10 list in 2020; and five in 2021. The series also ranked fifth on Tumblr's Top 10 overall in the 2018 list; it ranked ninth on the Top 20 overall in 2020; and tenth on the Top 21 overall in 2021. It placed seventeenth on Twitter Japan's Trend Awards in 2021, based on the social network's top trending topics of the year.
In April 2024, My Hero Academia was the most popular animated superhero show or franchise according to analyst Miles Atherton, where the data was compiled through social media engagement for the popular new series and its growing popularity for anime. With 4.7 million social media engagements, it was the second most-discussed series, ahead of X-Men '97, Invincible, and KonoSuba in the last 30 days, despite the seventh season having not began airing.


=== Manga ===


==== Sales ====
My Hero Academia has been a significant commercial success since the manga's release; in 2014, the first volume reached seventh place on Oricon's weekly manga chart with 71,575 copies sold. It sold out almost immediately on its first printing. Volume two reached sixth place, with 167,531 copies and, by January 18, 2015, had sold 205,179 copies. In April 2015, volume three reached eighth place with 254,111 copies. Volume four reached sixth with 259,137 in June, and volume five peaked at ninth place with 279,414 copies in August.
By March 2017, the manga had over 10 million copies in circulation; over 13 million copies in circulation by February 2018; over 15 million copies in circulation by May 2018; over 16 million copies in circulation by August 2018; over 17 million copies in circulation by September 2018; over 20 million copies in circulation by December 2018; over 21 million copies in circulation by February 2019; over 26 million copies in circulation by December 2019; over 30 million copies in circulation by January 2021; over 50 million copies in circulation by April 2021, with 37 million being sold in Japan and the remaining 13 million in the rest of the world; over 65 million copies in circulation by January 2022, with 45 million being sold in Japan and the remaining 20 million elsewhere; over 85 million copies in circulation by February 2023; and over 100 million copies in circulation by April 2024.
The My Hero Academia franchise sales generated an estimated ¥16 billion in revenue in Japan between 2016 and 2020. The series was the sixth best-selling manga series in the first half of 2017, with over 2 million copies sold, while volumes 12 and 13 were some of the top 50 best-selling manga volumes. By the end of the year, it was the fourth best-selling manga series with over 5.8 million copies sold, while volumes 12–15 were among the 50 best-selling manga volumes. In 2018, the seventeenth volume of the manga had received an initial print run of 600,000 copies. It was the fifth best-selling manga in the first half of 2018 with over 2.5 million copies sold, while volumes 17 and 18 were the thirteenth and seventeenth best-selling manga volumes, respectively. The series ranked sixth on Rakuten's Top 20 Best Selling Digital Manga of 2018. It was the second best-selling manga of 2018, behind One Piece, with over 6.7 million copies sold; volumes 17–20 were among the 50 best-selling manga volumes, having sold over 3 million copies combined. The 22nd volume topped Oricon's ranking sales chart list in February 2019, with 576,148 copies sold. The series was the fourth best-selling manga in the first half of 2019, with over 3.1 million copies sold; volumes 21–23 were among the 50 best-selling manga volumes of the year. It was the sixth best-selling manga in 2019, with over 5 million copies sold. Along with One-Punch Man, the series had an initial print run of 660,000 copies, with its 26th volume in 2020. The series was the fifth best-selling manga in the first half of 2020, with over 3 million copies sold. It ranked twelfth on Rakuten's Top 20 Best Selling Digital Manga of 2020.
My Hero Academia was the eighth best-selling manga series in 2020, with over 6 million copies sold. The 29th volume had an initial print run of 680,000 copies in 2021. The series was the fifth best-selling manga in 2021 and 2022, with over 7 million and 5.3 million copies sold, respectively; volumes 33–35 were among the 30 best-selling manga volumes of 2022. It ranked eighth on Rakuten's Top 20 Best Selling Digital Manga of 2021, and ninth in 2022. Volumes 37–39 were among the best-selling manga volumes of 2023. The series ranked twelfth on Rakuten's Top 20 Best Selling Digital Manga of 2023. Volume 38 was Shueisha's fifth-highest first print run manga volume of 2023–2024 (period from April 2023 to March 2024), with 815,000 copies printed. In December 2024, the 42nd and final volume sold 1 million copies in its first week, making My Hero Academia the fourth manga series to achieve this feat in a single print volume, with the others being Demon Slayer: Kimetsu no Yaiba, Attack on Titan, and One Piece. It was also the series' highest-selling manga volume in  Oricon's first week chart, with 616,671 copies sold. Its volume had an initial print run of 850,000 copies printed, making it Shueisha's sixth-highest first print run manga volume of 2024–2025 (period from April 2024 to March 2025).
In North America, the volumes of My Hero Academia appeared on The New York Times Manga Best Seller list for several weeks, with volume one, which was released in August 2015, debuting at fourth place. The volumes were also ranked on Circana (formerly NPD) BookScan's monthly top 20 adult graphic novels list since August 2016, while it was on the top 20 manga graphic novels list in September, October and December 2018. In Q4 2018, My Hero Academia was the best-selling manga franchise according to ICv2. Several volumes of the manga have also been ranked on The New York Times' Graphic Books and Manga bestseller monthly list since November 2019. Volumes 1 and 26 ranked third and sixth, respectively, on Publishers Weekly's bestseller list in March 2021. Volume 28 also charted on the Publishers Weekly's bestseller list in September 2021, ranking fifth.
According to ICv2, My Hero Academia was the fifth best-selling manga franchise in Q4 2021 (September–December) in the United States. According to NPD BookScan, it was the best-selling manga series in 2020, with nine volumes featured on the top 20 adult graphic novels list; seven volumes were ranked among the top 20 highest-selling manga volumes in 2021; two volumes were among the top 20 highest-selling manga volumes in 2022 and 2023. The first volume had over 1.2 million copies in circulation by 2022 and the franchise as a whole has over 10 million copies in circulation in the United States.


==== Critical reception ====
Nick Creamer of Anime News Network gave the first volume a B rating. Creamer praised Horikoshi's artwork, describing it as "absolutely professional" and "consistent and highly polished", but also stated that it was fast-paced and very sharply drawn. He praised the plot and characters, saying that despite it feeling like a typical shōnen plot, it did well enough to still feel fresh and entertaining. He also stated that the characters had great energy and personality. Isaac Akers from The Fandom Post gave the second volume a B+ rating. He praised the art, saying that Horikoshi's character designs and art bolster the volume's ability to feel as if it does everything it does just because the volume likes doing it. He concluded that My Hero Academia was a difficult series to dislike, making it as the "real joy to read" by executing the author's ideas and having enough nerve and twist. Sean Gaffney from A Case Suitable for Treatment referred to the art as "smooth" and complemented how it flows with the action. Gaffney also praised the story, characters, and fight scenes, stating that the story flows nicely with each of their individual personalities, while the fight scenes look smooth and non-confusing.
In a review of the second volume, Leroy Douresseaux from Comic Book Bin also praised the story, specifically the way it executed comedy and drama. He also compared the series to the other superhero works such as Tiger & Bunny and One-Punch Man, stating that My Hero Academia proved that "manga can do superhero comic books that are every bit as imaginative as American superhero comics". Manga Bookshelf praised the first volume for its art, saying that it demonstrated Horikoshi's skill very well, though criticizing it for having too much narration at some points. Reviewing volumes 1 to 19, Michelle Smith from Soliloquy in Blue called the plot "very good", but also stated that the main reason she liked the series was the characters, specifically praising most of the main cast. However, she criticized the series for not giving some of the female characters enough spotlight despite praising their varied character designs and personalities.
The series was chosen as one of the Best Manga at the Comic-Con International Best & Worst Manga in 2018 and 2019. Barnes & Noble named it on their list of "Our Favorite Manga of 2018", saying that "it combines the earnestness of superhero comics with the core elements of shonen manga", but also stated that the reason the story was a delight was due to Horikoshi's "endlessly inventive imagination", praising most of the characters' abilities that are more "quirks" than superpowers. Cold Cobra of Anime UK News picked the series for his list of "best manga of 2010s", praising its mix between the Japanese shonen action genre and American superhero comics. He stated that its cast of characters is what makes it stand out more than anything. He described the artwork as "wonderfully expressive and occasionally impressively shaded for those big full-page moments", which made it a joy to read.


==== Awards and nominations ====


=== Anime ===


==== Sales ====
My Hero Academia sales have been high and the series has been successful in Japan since the release of the anime. The five volumes of the first season on Blu-ray and DVD were released in Japan, with each release appearing in Oricon's Animation Blu-ray and Animation DVD ranking. The first Blu-ray edition of My Hero Academia ranked fifth in the first week of Oricon's Blu-ray ranking, while the first DVD edition ranked fourth with 2,184 copies sold. The second Blu-ray and DVD sets also ranked, with the Blu-ray edition coming in sixth and DVD fifth for a week. The third Blu-ray edition ranked fourth with 1,700 copies sold, while the DVD release was eighth with 1,184 copies sold. The fourth Blu-ray and DVD collections ranked fifth and fourth, respectively. The fifth Blu-ray and DVD release sales ranked higher than the previous volumes; the Blu-ray came in at third with 1,473 copies sold and the DVD ranked second with 1,068 copies sold in a week. Four volumes of the second season on Blu-ray and DVD also appeared in Oricon's Animation Blu-ray and DVD ranking. The first Blu-ray edition ranked seventh, while the DVD ranked fifth. The third Blu-ray edition was among the top 20 in Oricon's Animation Blu-ray ranking, while the DVD was tenth among the 30 Animation DVD ranking. The seventh Blu-ray and DVD ranked eighth, while the eighth Blu-ray and DVD sets ranked fourth.
The second season's opening theme, "Peace Sign" by Kenshi Yonezu, topped the Billboard charts on the Billboard Japan Hot 100; it peaked at number two on the Oricon charts. By the end of 2017, the Bootleg soundtrack album including "Peace Sign" became the top-selling anime CD album on Oricon's chart with 241,754 copies sold. It was the top-selling anime CD album in the first half of 2018 with 134,777 copies sold; the other compilation album, LiSA BEST: Day, which includes the second ending theme song of the second season, "Datte Atashi no Hero" by LiSA, ranked fifth on Oricon's chart simultaneously. Seven volumes of the third season on Blu-ray and DVD appeared in Oricon's Animation Blu-ray and DVD ranking, respectively. The first Blu-ray edition ranked ninth, while the DVD ranked third. The second Blu-ray edition ranked sixth, while the DVD ranked fifth. The third Blu-ray edition ranked fourth, while the DVD ranked second. The fourth Blu-ray and DVD sets ranked fifth and sixth, respectively. The fifth Blu-ray set ranked third with 1,194 copies sold, while the DVD ranked second. The seventh Blu-ray and DVD sets ranked ninth and sixth, respectively. The eighth Blu-ray and DVD sets ranked fourth and third, respectively. By the end of 2018, Bootleg became the top-selling anime CD album for the second consecutive year while LiSA BEST: Day ranked ninth on Oricon's chart.


==== Critical reception ====
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the first season of My Hero Academia holds an approval rating of 100% based on ten reviews, with an average rating of 8.7/10. Alex Osborn of IGN gave the first season a nine out of ten rating, praising its action, story, and characters, while criticizing its villains as underdeveloped. Osborn also stated that "its excellent character design only elevates the memorable cast even further". He concluded that "the first season of My Hero Academia delivers thirteen episodes of fantastic action, elevated by a heartfelt story that's wrapped around a core cast of memorable and relatable characters". In his review for the second season, Osborn praised it as "truly something special", complimenting the animation, character developments, and emotions. He called it as "one of the best TV shows" he had ever watched. Tom Speelman of Polygon praised the anime for its animation, action and characters. Speelman also stated that compared to other superhero teams like X-Men or Legion of Super-Heroes, My Hero Academia's biggest asset is its huge cast, with even minor characters having a "fun look" or "interesting personality" for readers to latch onto. He noted that it has similarities to the other shows and comics like Teen Titans, Runaways, or Young Justice, though he felt its closest thematic analog is the 2005 Disney film Sky High. Chris Beveridge from The Fandom Post also praised the anime. He said that despite it being a long running series, it manages to not feel directionless and has several great moments.
Nick Creamer of Anime News Network also praised the adaptation. He gave praise to the music and animation in the action scenes, while criticizing the pacing and stating that the animation can be average at times. In his review of the second season, he gave it praise for the improvements to both pacing and animation. Sam Leach of Anime News Network highlighted the 49th episode, which is the second battle between All Might and All For One. Leach wrote: "It was unavoidable that this was going to be a beautiful episode. That bloodied-up All Might is striking in either form, and you can tell they pulled out all the stops in making the big hits as intense and crazy as possible. From a pacing perspective, I'm really pleased with how this Bakugo Rescue arc played out." He concluded: "This is My Hero Academia's proudest moment in the spotlight. Not only does it continue to be the darling of modern Shonen Jump with one of the mostly perfectly tuned anime adaptations a long-running series has ever received, this is an accomplishment of storytelling across the board." Marina Garrow from Anime Feminist praised the way the plot handles damsel-in-distress elements, especially when compared to other shōnen series, stating that the female characters are not the only characters that need saving, and when they do need saving, the situations are realistic and not overexaggerated.
Both the original Japanese cast and the English dub received praise from critics. Osborn applauded the casting choices and overall voice work, adding that [Izuku's voice actor] Daiki Yamashita is a "perfect fit" in the Japanese dub, while praising Justin Briner's performance in English as excellent and standout. Creamer rated both equally, stating that the dub cast of the major characters generally fits their roles very well, though criticizing some of the background characters' performances. Andy Hanley from UK Anime Network concured, stating both casts had strong performances; however, he gave special praise to the dub cast, saying that each actor fits their role very well. Speelman stated that both Japanese and English casts know exactly how to make these roles work. He noted that both Yamashita and Briner's voice as Izuku "nail the optimistic nerdiness and heroic attitude", with Briner "channeling a bit of Morty Smith for good measure". He also praised the voice performances of All Might, noting that Japanese voice actor Kenta Miyake "nails the goofy earnestness of the part", while English voice actor Christopher Sabat "was essentially Superman", Speelman felt was a "great fit".
The anime series has been named as one of the best of the 2010s in several publications. Writing for Comic Book Resources, Sage Ashford ranked it fourth on his list, praising its character development. Although he criticized the series' perceived lack of originality, he felt it executes the classic shōnen tropes perfectly, describing it as the "most finely tuned battle shonen ever created". Paste ranked My Hero Academia among the top 50 anime of all time. In November 2019, Polygon named it as one of the best anime of the 2010s, and Crunchyroll listed it in their "Top 25 best anime of the 2010s". In January 2020, IGN and Thrillist named it among the best anime series of the 2010s. Japan Web Magazine ranked the series 24th on its list of "30 Best Anime of All Time".


==== Accolades ====
At the Crunchyroll's inaugural Anime Awards in 2017, Izuku was awarded "Hero of the Year" while the anime series was nominated in six other categories including "Anime of the Year". In December 2017, the second season of My Hero Academia was among the Top 100 Favorites nominated for Anime of the Year at the Tokyo Anime Award Festival 2018. At the 2nd Crunchyroll Anime Awards in 2018, the season won seven out of ten nominations: Best Action, Best Animation, Best Opening ("Peace Sign"), Best Girl (Ochaco Uraraka), Best Boy (Shoto Todoroki), Best Villain (Stain), and Best Hero (Izuku Midoriya) categories; Christopher Sabat also received the Industry Icon Award for his role as All Might. The series ranked first in a "mega poll" of the readers for Best Anime of 2017 and 2018 by Anime News Network.
My Hero Academia won "Shonen Series of the Decade" at the Funimation's Decade of Anime poll, where the fans voted for their favorite anime across multiple categories. In the other fan poll, Izuku Midoriya and Shoto Todoroki were chosen as one of the "Best Boys of the Decade", while Ochaco Uraraka became one of the five recipients for the "Best Girls of the Decade" category. In 2021, the series won the "Most In-Demand Anime Series of 2020" at the third Global TV Demand Awards; it won the same category at the seventh Global Demand Awards in 2025, while being one of the finalists for "Most In-Demand TV Series in the World 2024". In 2023, the series along with Attack on Titan, became the first anime to receive an Astra TV Award nomination for "Best Streaming Animated Series or TV Movie" at the inaugural Astra Creative Arts TV Awards.


==== Awards and nominations ====


=== Unit 731 controversy ===
In early 2020, the series caused a controversy in South Korea and China for a character's name allegedly referencing Unit 731, an infamous Imperial Japanese army unit known its immensely brutal and inhumane experiments on prisoners of war (POWs), including the vivisecting of captured Chinese, Korean, and Russian soldiers and civilians. In response, the series has been removed from digital platforms in China, and the character's name was changed to no longer reference Unit 731. A day prior, both Weekly Shōnen Jump manga magazine publisher Shueisha and the manga's author Kōhei Horikoshi issued individual apology statements on Twitter.
In the aftermath of the manga's removal from its services in China, the English-language news service Abacus reached out to bilibili and Tencent for its request. The former stated that the removal was "in accordance with China's policies" but declined to comment further, while the latter did not respond to Abacus' request for comment. The character's name was changed again in the digital version of Weekly Shōnen Jump following the backlash. Shueisha promised that "going forward, we intend to devote our energies toward deepening our understanding of a variety of historical and cultural matters." Both the publisher and manga's creator reiterated that the reference to war crimes within the character's name was wholly unintentional.
Following the controversy, the work has often been regarded as an anti-China anime. In June 2025, there were multiple reports of cosplayers portraying characters from the work being attacked in China.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official manga website at Weekly Shōnen Jump (in Japanese)
Official anime website (in Japanese)
My Hero Academia at Viz Media
My Hero Academia at Rotten Tomatoes 
My Hero Academia (manga) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia