Nintendo Video is a discontinued video on demand service for the Nintendo 3DS which streamed hand-picked 3D and 2D video content from external providers. Some of the studios which broadcast content to the service were CollegeHumor, Aardman Animations, Blue Man Group, Channel Frederator Network, and Mondo Media, among others.
The app first launched in July 2011 for Nintendo 3DS owners worldwide, with Nintendo promising new videos to be released weekly for the service. Nintendo Video was officially discontinued in 2014 in most territories, but the service was still available in North America until July 2015. Many of the videos that were featured on Nintendo Video were then carried over to the Nintendo eShop, where they were accessible until its closure in 2023; users can still redownload them provided they have purchased them prior to the closure.
Some Nintendo Video related content have since been released to other video platforms such as YouTube, however some of the content formerly available on the application have not been rereleased nor archived in any way, shape or form and are now considered to be lost.


== History ==
Previously, the service was available as a separate app that utilized SpotPass, downloading videos to the console's SD card via Wi-Fi Internet access for offline viewing. New content could be automatically downloaded via SpotPass, replacing the old content.
The dedicated Nintendo Video app launched in Australia, Europe, and Japan on the 3DS eShop for free on July 13, 2011, with initial videos including Oscar's Oasis and Magic Tricks for the Nintendo 3DS. The app became available in North America a few days later on July 21, 2011. Some of the other first shorts that were available on the app were CollegeHumor's Dinosaur Office and a trailer for Captain America: The First Avenger, with plans to add music videos from Jason Derulo, Foster the People, and the Blue Man Group. Additionally, Nintendo announced that the app would receive an exclusive 3D music video from OK Go, who had previously had a music video released as a downloadable video exclusive to North American 3DS systems before the release of the eShop.
In 2012, Nintendo created a joint venture for Nintendo Video Original Series and distributed their first Original Series for Nintendo Video, Threediots.


== Content ==

Since June 2015, many of the shows listed below can be viewed on-demand via the Nintendo eShop in North America, permanently categorized under Nintendo Video. As of August 2019, a total of 164 videos were available on the eShop. Users had to enter in their date of birth before watching content that was considered too mature.


=== Shows ===


=== Music videos ===


=== Movie trailers ===

In the unaired pilot for Nintendo Show 3D, host Jessie Cantrell mentioned trailers for movies planned to come to Nintendo Video at the time. These included Rio, Thor, Cars 2, and Green Lantern. However, none of these movies' trailers ever appeared on the service.


== Shutdown ==
On February 27, 2014, Nintendo Australia announced the service would be terminated in the Oceanian region (Australia and New Zealand) as of March 31, 2014. Nintendo of Europe also announced on the same day that they would be terminating the Nintendo Video service on the same date. Nintendo also announced the end of service on that date, ending it on March 31, 2014, as well.
On June 5, 2015, Nintendo of America sent out a SpotPass notification to all of the app's active users informing them that the app was being phased out in favor of an eponymous category on the Nintendo eShop's main page (already available at the time), where users could watch most past videos as well as future ones. Since June 29, 2015, the app is no longer functional and videos can no longer be downloaded. In addition to adding videos on the eShop, a few months after the My Nintendo service launched, videos for permanent download became a common reward that could be bought with Platinum points. Videos would commonly make returns due to popularity or stay longer due to positive fan reception.
The remaining Nintendo Video content and other video on demand content under the Nintendo Video category became permanently unavailable for viewing or download when the Nintendo eShop closed on March 27, 2023. Despite the closure, these can still be redownloaded, however, provided that the user has downloaded the content prior to the shop's closure. Most of the content initially released for the service have also been distributed through other means over time, such as being officially uploaded online or included in home media releases, albeit without the stereoscopic 3D effect.
Some of the videos that were shared through Nintendo video have not been recovered and are now considered lost media. Some examples of these include Red Bull BC One and BearShark: Ghost Videos. On June 1, 2025, one of the service's lost shows, Threediots, was uploaded to the Internet Archive.


== See also ==
Game Boy Advance Video
Nintendo Channel
Wii no Ma


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Archived 2013-08-08 at the Wayback Machine