"Nutbush City Limits" is a semi-autobiographical song written by American singer and actress Tina Turner which commemorates her rural hometown of Nutbush in Haywood County, Tennessee, United States. Originally released as a single on United Artists Records in August 1973, it is one of the last hits that husband-wife R&B duo Ike & Tina Turner released together.
In the years since, "Nutbush City Limits" has been performed by popular artists such as Bob Seger and The Silver Bullet Band or the Alvin Lee band in their album RX5. Besides, Turner herself has re-recorded several different versions of the song.
As an unincorporated rural community, Nutbush does not have geographical city limits; rather, its general boundaries are indicated by signs reading "Nutbush, Unincorporated" which are posted on the local highway (Tennessee State Route 19).
A line dance to the song, called the "Nutbush", created in the mid-1970s as a teaching aid in Australia, has seen sustained popularity in that country, and later gained viral popularity internationally through TikTok.


== Recording and release ==
Produced by Ike Turner, "Nutbush City Limits" was recorded at the Turners' Bolic Sound recording studio in Inglewood, California in May 1973. The song is characterized by inventive guitar sounds, a clavinet, a substantial Moog synthesizer solo by Ike, and a funky brass section.
None of the session musicians who contributed to "Nutbush City Limits" were given specific mention in the song credits. Alan Krigger, the future drummer of Giuffria, claimed being the drummer in an interview. It has been rumored for years that Marc Bolan, frontman for the glam rock band T. Rex, played guitar on the track. Gloria Jones, his girlfriend at the time—who herself provided backing vocals for Ike & Tina Turner during the 1960s—asserted that this was the case in the 2007 BBC4 documentary Marc Bolan: The Final Word. This claim is bolstered by the fact that Bolan toured the U.S. extensively and resided in the Los Angeles area during the mid-1970s, and is also acknowledged to have played on the Ike & Tina Turner singles "Sexy Ida (Part 2)" and "Baby—Get It On". However, a 2008 Ebony magazine article about Ike Turner's death identified James "Bino" Lewis, then a member of Ike & Tina's backing band Kings of Rhythm, as the guitarist. It has also been suggested that James Lewis is the guitarist on "Baby—Get It On".  But there are two guitars on that track: fuzz rhythm centre pan (which could be Bolan), with wah-wah guitar in the right channel, very typical of black playing like Lewis's.
Originally released as a single on United Artists Records in August 1973, it's one of the last hits that husband-wife R&B duo Ike & Tina Turner released together.
In 1984, a live version of "Nutbush City Limits" was released as the b-side of Tina Turner's single "Private Dancer" (the fourth U.S. single released from her "Private Dancer" album). This is a different version from the 1988 live version of the song, released as single in Europe, from her Break Every Rule world tour.


== Reception and awards ==
The single received positive reviews. A reviewer for Cash Box (August 11, 1973) wrote: "Proud Mary" was the single that brought this dynamic group to national attention. Well, here's one that leaves all of their prior efforts in the dust. Absolutely sensational is the only way this future smash can be described. Has to go top 20.The single was a hit in various countries, peaking at No. 11 on the Billboard R&B singles chart, No. 22 on the Billboard Hot 100, and No. 4 on the UK Singles Chart. It also reached No. 1 in Austria, and No. 2 in Switzerland and West Germany. In Australia, the single peaked at No. 14, spent 52 weeks in the top 100, and is still a party staple among Generation X and Y where it is accompanied by a dance of the same name.
The song was the lead single from album Nutbush City Limits, released in November 1973, which peaked at No. 22 on the Billboard R&B albums chart.
In 1973, the single was certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for selling a quarter of a million units. In 1974, the Turners received the first ever Golden European Award for selling more than one million records of "Nutbush City Limits" in Europe.


== 1988 live version ==
Following the couple's split, the song became a staple of Tina's live show where she reworked the funky studio version into a hard-driving rock and roll showstopper. A live recording of "Nutbush City Limits" from Turner's 1986–1987 Break Every Rule Tour was released as the lead single to promote the 1988 double album Tina Live in Europe, but it was in fact a different recording than the one that appeared on the official concert album. While this version did not manage to register much of an impact on any charts, the single is notable for being one of the first by Turner to be released on compact disc, at that time a relatively new format, in addition to 7" and 3-track 12" vinyl editions.
Both the CD and 12" singles featured a 10-minute 57-second live rendition of ZZ Top's song "Legs" from their 1983 album Eliminator, which was not included on the Tina Live in Europe album. A shorter version of "Legs", recorded during Turner's 1993 What's Love? Tour, would later appear on her 1994 CD box set The Collected Recordings - Sixties to Nineties.

"Nutbush City Limits" (live) – 3:30
Tina Live in Europe album track – 3:43


== 1991 remixes ==
Turner re-recorded "Nutbush City Limits" in a modern dance style—subtitled "The 90s Version"—for inclusion on her 1991 compilation album Simply the Best. Upon its release as a single, the song peaked at No. 23 on the UK Singles Chart and was a Top 20 hit in several other European countries. A different rendition, entitled "Nutbush City Limits ('91)", appeared alongside "The 90s Version". This funkier yet more laid-back arrangement is actually the one for which Turner recorded new vocals that were later remixed by producers Chris "C. J." Mackintosh and Dave Dorrell to become "The 90s Version". The 12" single also featured an extended six-minute version of the dance remix, and a limited-release promotional DJ edition from the UK included still another take, "A Little Bit o' Bush". The corresponding music video for "The 90s Version" shows Turner recording the song in studio, intercut with footage of the various landmarks mentioned.

"Nutbush City Limits (The 90s Version)" – 3:43
"Nutbush City Limits ('91)" – 4:16
"Nutbush City Limits (Nutbush City '91)" – 6:00
"A Little Bit o' Bush" – 5:01


== 1993 re-recording ==
In 1993, Turner re-recorded the track as a re-working of the original studio arrangement for the What's Love Got to Do with It soundtrack album.


== Charts ==


== Certifications ==


== Nutbush dance ==

The song has gained cult popularity in Australia, particularly due to the Nutbush dance. The dance is often performed at weddings, school concerts, and bushdances. Turner never performed the dance to the song, although there are similarities between it and performances by Turner and The Ikettes in the seventies. The origins of the dance have been elusive, though in May 2024, ABC News Australia reported on research indicating that the dance routine for the Nutbush was most likely invented by the education department of the state of New South Wales in Australia, having been distributed to teacher training institutions as a teaching aid in 1975.


== References ==


== External links ==
"Nutbush City Limits" at Discogs
lyrics
Nutbush City Limits at 45Cat.com