Paramount Television Studios, formerly the second incarnation of Paramount Television, is the television arm of American film studio Paramount Pictures, a division of Paramount Skydance Corporation, founded on March 4, 2013, by its predecessor, Viacom, following an emerging vigorous business with the technological expansion of television via streaming services. Paramount also recognized that television could give them little to fall back on when films fail, except for studio stage rentals.
It was the revival and successor to Paramount's first television division, which rebranded as CBS Paramount Television and was kept by CBS Corporation, the new name for the original Viacom, on December 31, 2005 – on that same day, the second Viacom took ownership of Paramount Pictures. After the expiration of a 3-year licensing agreement between the split companies for the "Paramount" trademarks, CBS Paramount Television was rebranded to CBS Television Studios on May 17, 2009 and then currently CBS Studios on October 8, 2020. On January 14, 2020, following the closed merger of the second Viacom and CBS Corporation to form ViacomCBS (which changed name to the current Paramount Global on February 17, 2022), the revived Paramount Television was rebranded as Paramount Television Studios.
On August 13, 2024, following much of its staff being laid off in a series of cutbacks at Paramount, it was announced that the division would shut down by the end of that week, with any ongoing and development projects shifting to sister company CBS Studios. However, on August 4, 2025, it was announced that Paramount Television Studios would relaunch following the merger of Paramount Global and Skydance Media and the formation of Paramount Skydance Corporation, which completed three days later.


== History ==
On March 4, 2013, then-president and then-CEO of Viacom Philippe Dauman announced that Paramount opted to produce a television series based on one of their films. The show would allow Paramount to “get back, with very little investment, into the television production business.” Hours later, Paramount chairman/CEO Brad Grey announced that the studio was co-producing a CBS television series based on Beverly Hills Cop with Sony Pictures Television; however, the pilot did not move forward.
On July 22, 2013, Amy Powell was named president of Paramount Television. Until the re-merger of CBS Corporation and Viacom on December 4, 2019, the revived Paramount Television had no ties to the CBS network unlike the previous incarnation in its later years before the Viacom/CBS split. In addition, shows produced by the revived Paramount Television are distributed on home media by Paramount Home Entertainment under the main Paramount brand, while shows produced by the original Paramount Television are released through CBS Home Entertainment due to CBS Studios owning the pre-2005 Paramount Television library.
A television series based on the 2003 film School of Rock was announced to air on Nickelodeon. On August 26, 2014, Paramount Television and HBO announced plans to develop a new series titled Ashecliffe which will serve as a prequel to the 2010 Paramount Pictures film Shutter Island.
On May 27, 2014, Anonymous Content signed a 3-year first-look deal with Paramount Television to produce and distribute scripted programming. On October 23, 2014, Chapter Eleven, the production company of Kyle Killen and Scott Pennington, signed a 2-year deal with Paramount Television and Anonymous Content after Killen left 20th Century Fox Television (now just 20th Television).
On July 14, 2014, Robert Zemeckis, his producing partner Jack Rapke and their production company, Compari Entertainment, signed a 2-year first-look pact with Paramount Television. On January 6, 2017, Paramount Television signed a first-look agreement with Federation Entertainment. On July 19, 2018, Paramount Television fired its president Powell, following reports that several people had "concerns around [Powell's] comments [made in a] professional setting which they believed were inconsistent" with Viacom's and Paramount's values; claims which Powell countered and was considering legal action. On September 5, 2018, she was replaced as Paramount Television president by Nicole Clemens.
Viacom indicated that Paramount Television generated $400 million in revenue and produced 9 series at the end-of-year review in 2018. In 2019, Paramount's chief executive Jim Gianopulos indicated that Paramount Television would have 20 series in production and double its profit. On August 16, 2021, following the rebrand, Auriel Rudnick had signed an overall deal with Paramount Television Studios.
On April 11, 2023, Paramount Television Studios signed a multi-year first-look deal with Brillstein Entertainment Partners.
Sometime in 2024, management of Paramount Television Studios was transferred to Paramount Global's fellow CBS Entertainment-owned production subsidiary CBS Studios. On August 13, following two rounds of layoffs at Paramount Global that year which included much of Paramount Television Studios' team, it was announced that the division would be shut down by the end of that week, with current series as well as those in development shifting to CBS Studios instead.
On August 7, 2025 when Paramount Global merged with Skydance Media to form Paramount Skydance Corporation, Paramount Television Studios was revived to house its television production assets when the new parent merged its former production divisions Showtime/MTV Entertainment Studios and Skydance Television (who formerly co-produced series with Paramount Television Studios such as Reacher) alongside their current & future production states into the revived television studio who would take over incorporate production content from the former two studios as former Skydance Television president Matt Thunell leading the revived division as its president. Skydance Media's CCO and Skydance Television's co-founder Dana Goldberg joined the revived TV production studio Paramount Television Studios as co-chair who would oversee the relaunched TV studios and Showtime/MTV Entertainment Studios' head of scripted Keith Cox had joined the revived television studio Paramount Television Studios as its head of scripted with them interrogate's Showtime/MTV's overall deal with Taylor Sheridan.
Two months later in October of that year following the Paramount Television Studios' relaunch by Paramount Skydance, Paramount Television Studios took over Nickelodeon Productions and Awesomeness' production studio including Nickelodeon's & Awesomeness' production states. The two production units were folded into the Paramount Television Studios as they would take over Nickelodeon's current production state alongside Awesomeness' current productions, and would produce their future production slates beginning with the upcoming Victorious spin-off series Hollywood Arts which was originally ordered at Nickelodeon had moved to Netflix as its first Nickelodeon-branded series produced by the revived studio. Nickelodeon Animation Studio likewise became part of Paramount Television Studios, effectively merging it with MTV Animation.
A week later in that same month following the takeover production of the upcoming series Hollywood Arts, Paramount Television Studios announced that Skydance Television EVP & physical production Drew Brown had been named Head of Production at PTVS as it had folded Paramount Skydance's youth-focused production studio Awesomeness into the latter television studio whilst Skydance Television's EVP, Head of Development Shelley Zimmerman and Carolyn Harris assumed the same roles of EVP, Head of Development at Paramount Television Studios alongside former Netflix whilst Arturo Reyes had joined the television studios for the role of Head of Production Finance. Paramount Television Studios had also appointed former Netflix EMEA VP Mel Rauch to become its Head of Finance while former Skydance Television EVP and Global Head of Production Finance Arturo Reyes became Head of Production Finance at the latter television studio.


== Productions ==


== Paramount Worldwide Television Licensing & Distribution ==

Paramount Worldwide Television Licensing & Distribution was the television distribution arm of Paramount Pictures, a subsidiary of Paramount Skydance.
It is the successor to Paramount's original syndication arm, Paramount Domestic Television, which was renamed to CBS Paramount Domestic Television on January 17, 2006, and later was merged with King World Productions to form CBS Television Distribution (now CBS Media Ventures) on September 26, 2006. It is also the successor to Paramount's original international distribution arm, Paramount International Television, which was merged with CBS Broadcast International to form CBS Paramount International Television in August 2004, and was later renamed to CBS Studios International on May 20, 2009.
Paramount Pictures returned to television operations on March 4, 2013, forming a new syndication unit in the process. In 2020, Paramount Worldwide Television Licensing & Distribution and CBS Studios International were merged to form ViacomCBS Global Distribution Group (currently known as Paramount Global Content Distribution), while U.S. distribution rights to the unit's content were assumed by Paramount Pictures' distribution department; some films are licensed to Trifecta Entertainment & Media, and series produced by Paramount Television Studios were transferred to CBS Media Ventures in 2024.


== See also ==
CBS Studios, the corporate sibling of Paramount Television Studios
Paramount Television, the original incarnation of this division
Paramount Domestic Television, the television distribution arm of the original Paramount Television
CBS Media Ventures
Desilu Productions, the predecessor to the television division of Paramount Pictures
Viacom Productions
Paramount Pictures
List of Paramount Pictures executives


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website