Paris Campbell (born December 23, 1992) is an American TikToker, comedian, and singer-songwriter. She began her career in stand-up comedy in 2012 and has performed at various clubs in New York City. Campbell started working on musical projects with her then wife, punk rock musician Laura Jane Grace, in 2023. Together with Grace, she joined musicians Matt Paton of Drive-By Truckers and Mikey Erg of The Ergs! to form the punk rock band the Mississippi Medicals. She is also a member of the band Laura Jane Grace and the Trauma Tropes.


== Early life and family ==
Campbell was born in New York City on December 23, 1992, to Yolande "Dolly" Fox Campbell, an actress and philanthropist, and John Campbell, a musician. Her father died when she was an infant. Campbell's maternal grandparents were Matthew M. Fox, the former vice president of Universal Pictures, and Yolande Betbeze Fox, an opera singer and feminist activist who was crowned Miss America 1951. She is of French Basque descent through her grandmother and Jewish descent through her grandfather. Campbell spent part of her childhood at her grandmother's mansion, the Newton D. Baker House, in Georgetown, Washington, D.C., where she was raised by her grandmother and her grandmother's partner, Cherif Guellal, who was the Algerian Ambassador to the United States.

Campbell was educated at the Southern France Youth Institute in Villesèque-des-Corbières and at The Grier School, an all-girls boarding school in Tyrone, Pennsylvania. Upon completing high school, Campbell studied at Virginia Commonwealth University.


== Career ==
Campbell began her career performing stand-up comedy after graduating from high school. She has appeared on shows at The Stand, Jimmy Kimmel's Comedy Club, New York Comedy Club, and Broadway Comedy Club.  
Campbell is a TikToker and previously was employed by Apple Inc. as a hardware engineer. A TikTok video she made about how to deal with a stolen iPhone went viral, receiving over five million views within a twenty-four hour period. Campbell claimed Apple threatened to fire her after she made the video. She was later fired from Apple over an issue regarding medical leave during the COVID-19 pandemic.
She was featured in The New York Times, New York Post, Fortune, and Unilad.
Campbell is a member of the band the Mississippi Medicals, along with Laura Jane Grace, Matt Patton, and Mikey Erg. They released their first two singles, "All Fucked Out" and "Karma's Coming Close", in June and July 2024, respectively. On July 30, 2024, they announced their upcoming six-track EP titled "Give an Inch", which was released on September 6, 2024. She is also a member of the band Laura Jane Grace in the Trauma Tropes. She was a co-writer on the band's album Adventure Club.


== Personal life ==
Campbell married American rock musician Laura Jane Grace in Las Vegas on December 18, 2023, after having met the month before. On July 17, 2025, following allegations of emotional and verbal abuse shared by Campbell on social media expressing that she felt “unsafe,” Grace moved out of their shared Chicago home.


== References ==


== External links ==
IMDB