Peter Benjamin Mandelson, Baron Mandelson (born 21 October 1953), is a British politician, lobbyist and diplomat. He was Member of Parliament (MP) for Hartlepool from 1992 to 2004 and served in the Cabinets of Tony Blair and Gordon Brown as Minister without portfolio, Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Business Secretary and First Secretary of State. He served as British Ambassador to the United States from February to September 2025 under Keir Starmer.
A member of the Labour Party, Mandelson served as its director of communications from 1985 to 1990 during the leadership of Neil Kinnock, becoming one of the first people to whom the term "spin doctor" was applied and being nicknamed the "Prince of Darkness" because of his "ruthless" and "media-savvy" reputation. Although sidelined during John Smith's leadership from 1992 to 1994, Mandelson became close to Blair and Brown. Mandelson was one of several key individuals responsible for the rebranding of the Labour Party as New Labour before its victory at the 1997 general election under Blair, to whom he had become a trusted ally and adviser. He was also heavily involved in the 2001 general election, famously delivering his "I'm a fighter, not a quitter" speech, but was not a member of the government at the time, having resigned a few months earlier.
Mandelson served as Business Secretary, Innovation and Skills and President of the Board of Trade in 1998 and again from 2008 to 2010, Secretary of State for Northern Ireland from 1999 to 2001 as well as First Secretary of State and Lord President of the Council from 2009 to 2010. He was European Commissioner for Trade from 2004 to 2008 and MP for Hartlepool from 1992 to 2004, before being elevated to the House of Lords as a life peer in 2008 to serve in the Brown cabinet as Business Secretary in 2008, a move that surprised many due to his long-standing political rivalry with Brown. After Labour lost the 2010 general election, Mandelson co-founded the lobbying firm Global Counsel and remained active in Labour politics in the years preceding their return to office at the 2024 general election, having been an adviser to Starmer for a few years prior, and was described as having a "significant influence" on Starmer's office as a "core part" of his political network. During his short tenure as British Ambassador, Mandelson focused on promoting trade and fostering relationships with the US government during the second presidency of Donald Trump.
Mandelson was often embroiled in controversy during his political career, which resulted in him twice resigning from the Cabinet and being dismissed from his ambassadorial office in 2025. He bought a home in 1996 partly with an interest-free loan of £373,000 from Geoffrey Robinson, a Cabinet colleague whose business dealings were subject to an inquiry by Mandelson's department. Mandelson contended that he had deliberately not partaken in any decisions relating to Robinson. He had not declared the loan in the Register of Members' Interests and resigned in December 1998. In January 2001 he again resigned from the government following accusations of using his position to influence a passport application. In September 2025, a scandal occurred surrounding Mandelson's association with the convicted sex offenders and traffickers Jeffrey Epstein and Ghislaine Maxwell, which had previously been revealed in 2019. He faced repeated calls to resign as ambassador to the US following published communications regarding his association with Epstein; he was dismissed by Starmer following mounting criticism, and has been stripped of honorary awards and titles. Mandelson for his part expressed deep regret for the association and "profound sympathy" for Epstein's victims, claiming he was "taken in" by a "charismatic criminal liar".


== Early life and education ==
Peter Mandelson was born in Hendon, Middlesex, on 21 October 1953, the younger son of the Hon. Mary Joyce Mandelson (née Morrison) and George Norman Mandelson (1920–1988). Of Polish Jewish extraction, his patrilineal great-great-great-grandfather was Colonel Naphtali Felthousen Mendelssohn; his great-grandfather, Levy Mandelson (1834–1891), was son-in-law of Samuel Cohen MLA; and, his grandfather, Norman Levy Mandelson (1872–1956), founded the Harrow United Synagogue. His father George Norman Mandelson (known as Tony) was the advertising manager of The Jewish Chronicle who served as an officer in the Royal Dragoons during the Second World War. On his mother's side, Mandelson is a grandson of Herbert Morrison, London County Council leader and a Cabinet Minister in the Attlee government. Mandelson was raised in Hampstead Garden Suburb; recalling his childhood, he said: "my whole upbringing was framed around the Suburb – my friendships and values".


=== Education ===
Mandelson attended the Garden Suburb School, and from 1965 to 1972 Hendon County Grammar School. In 1966, he appeared on stage with the local amateur theatre group, the Hampstead Garden Suburb Dramatic Society, as the eponymous lead in The Winslow Boy. During his teenage years he joined the Young Communist League due to the UK's support of the United States' role in the Vietnam War. He was educated at the University of Oxford as an undergraduate of St Catherine's College, Oxford, where he read philosophy, politics and economics (PPE); his tutors included Nicholas (now Lord) Stern.


== Early career ==
As Chairman of the British Youth Council, in 1978 Mandelson was delegated to attend the Soviet-organised World Festival of Youth and Students at Havana, Cuba. He was elected to Lambeth Borough Council in 1979 but stood down in 1982, disillusioned with the state of Labour politics during the leadership of Michael Foot. Mandelson then worked from 1982 to 1985 as a television producer at London Weekend Television on Weekend World, where he formed a friendship with his superior John (now Lord) Birt.


== Political career ==


=== Director of communications ===
In 1985, the Labour Party leader Neil Kinnock appointed Mandelson the party's director of communications. As director, he was one of the first people in Britain to whom the term "spin doctor" was applied; he was thus called the "Prince of Darkness", a nickname also used by heavy metal personality Ozzy Osbourne. Mandelson ran the campaign at the 1986 Fulham by-election where Labour defeated the Conservative Party.
For the 1987 general election campaign, Mandelson commissioned film director Hugh Hudson, whose Chariots of Fire (1981) had won an Oscar as Best Picture, to make a party political broadcast promoting Kinnock as a potential prime minister. Tagged "Kinnock – the Movie", it led to the party leader's approval rating being raised by 16%, to 19%, in polls, and was even repeated in another PPB slot. The election, held on 11 June 1987, returned Margaret Thatcher's Conservatives for the third time, although Labour gained 20 seats, and, this time, convincingly pushed the SDP-Liberal Alliance into third place. Opponents termed the Labour Party's election campaign "a brilliantly successful election defeat". He ceased being a Labour Party official in 1990 when he was selected as Labour candidate for the constituency of Hartlepool, which was then considered a safe seat.


=== Member of Parliament ===

Mandelson was first elected to the House of Commons at the 1992 general election which John Major's Conservatives won, and made several speeches outlining his strong support for the European Union. Although sidelined during the brief period when John Smith led the Labour Party, Mandelson was by now close to two shadow cabinet members – Gordon Brown and Tony Blair – each regarded as potential future party leaders. Following Smith's sudden death on 12 May 1994, Mandelson opted to back Blair for the leadership, believing him a superior communicator to Brown, and played a leading role in the leadership campaign. This created acrimony between Mandelson and Brown, though they were considered to be allies in the Labour Party.
In 1994, Kate Garvey suggested that Mandelson (who was at the time being derided by the trades unions and other Labour factions), should adopt a nom de guerre throughout Blair's leadership bid, so that he might conceal his considerable role within the campaign team. Mandelson agreed to be called "Bobby" for the duration and was thanked by Blair using this pseudonym in his victory speech. After becoming a close ally and trusted adviser to Blair, Mandelson was Labour's election campaign director for the 1997 general election, which Labour won decisively, also winning re-election in the 2001 and 2005 general elections.


==== Parliamentary expenses ====
During the 2009 expenses scandal, The Daily Telegraph raised questions about the timing of Mandelson's second home allowance claim, dating from 2004, saying, "Lord Mandelson billed the taxpayer for almost £3,000 of work on his constituency home in Hartlepool less than a week after announcing his decision to stand down as an MP." Mandelson said in a statement, "The work done was necessary maintenance. All claims made were reasonable and submitted consistent with parliamentary rules."


=== Minister without Portfolio ===
Mandelson was appointed as a Minister without Portfolio in the Cabinet Office, where his job was to co-ordinate within government. A few months later, he also acquired responsibility for the Millennium Dome, after Blair decided to go ahead with the project despite the opposition of most of the Cabinet (including the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport who had been running it). Jennie Page, the Dome project's chief executive, was abruptly sacked after a farcical opening night. In June 2000, in what was seen as a reference to the close interest in the Dome from Mandelson, known at the time as so-called "Dome Secretary" and his successor Charlie Falconer, Baron Falconer of Thoroton, Page told the House of Commons Select Committee for Culture and Heritage: "I made several attempts to persuade ministers that standing back from the Dome would be good for them as well as good for the Dome".


=== Secretary of State for Trade and Industry ===
In July 1998, Mandelson was appointed to the Cabinet as Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and was sworn of the Privy Council; he launched the Millennium Bug And Electronic Commerce Bill and a Competitiveness White paper, which he described, as "bold, far reaching and absolutely necessary". He also appointed a "Net Tsar" to lead the UK in what he termed the "new industrial revolution". Mandelson reportedly urged Blair to proceed with the Post Office's Horizon IT system, leading to the British Post Office scandal in which thousands of innocent subpostmasters were wrongfully convicted of theft, fraud and false accounting.


==== Undisclosed home loan scandal ====
Mandelson was a friend of Labour MP and aerospace CEO Geoffrey Robinson since 1979 when he was a researcher to Labour MP Albert Booth. Mandelson had previously been financially supported by Robinson while working with trade unions, and had remained in touch with him intermittently. Robinson, stated that in 1994, Mandelson had written to Brown, offering his services and stating to Brown he should not seek leadership of what would become New Labour, and in so doing gravitated towards Tony Blair, causing a rift (also referred to as a "feud" by The Guardian) between Brown and Mandelson.

In 1996, Mandelson was invited to a New Statesman party in the Grosvenor House Hotel to Robinson's flat, and then subsequently to a dinner by Robinson, where Mandelson discussed difficulties with calls from Tony Blair at early hours, and also in a cri de coeur complained to Robinson that he was miserable in his small flat in Wilmington Square, and about his financial circumstances due to his "modest" salary in New Labour, complaining that he did not have "a flat in which he could relax and entertain his friends". Following this, Robinson queried his intentions: "I asked what he had in mind. He said "Oh there is a place in Notting Hill I would really like, but it's too expensive and there is no-one to help me!" At this point I said that financially I was in a good position and that I might be able to assist if he wanted me to. [...]
My interpretation of his remark was and remains that he was looking for a loan. I would not say that is why he had come to dinner. But, to judge from the alacrity with which he responded, I do not think I misinterpreted what he said." (The Unconventional Minister, p6)Mandelson rang Robinson at 9 am the next morning "anxiously asking if [Robinson] would buy him a house", to which Robinson responded in the affirmative, signalling he would give the loan to Mandelson. Robinson was also previously known as being linked to disgraced former businessman Robert Maxwell, had offshore funds which posed problems during his time in Labour, and was also alleged to have offered similar loans to other members of New Labour's cabinet.
Robinson stated that the loan was offered with no strings attached, with Mandelson in a hurry to buy a property, Robinson stated Mandelson asked if Robinson was willing to help him find a location in Notting Hill, to which Robinson accepted – stating that Mandelson settled on a four-story house in Northumberland Place, also stating "And [Mandelson] was quite undaunted at the prospect of so large a burden of debt." as Mandelson had stated he would pay it back with money from an inheritance, a salary he would "command" in the private sector which could pay the interest and repay the capital, and that also his eventual publication of memoirs would cover the cost, and for that reason Robinson saw Mandelson as "good for the money".
Mandelson bought a home in a highly-exclusive area of Notting Hill in October 1996 partly with an interest-free unsecured personal loan from Robinson, a Cabinet colleague and millionaire whose business dealings were subject to an inquiry by Mandelson's department, of £373,000 (£753,144 adjusted for inflation in 2025). The total value of the home was £475,000 (£959,097 adjusted for inflation in 2025).
The scandal further elaborated when Mandelson became Secretary of State for Trade and Industry on 27 July 1998 and was responsible for the Department of Trade and Industry's investigation into Robert Maxwell's embezzlement of pension funds, but had failed to recuse himself of the position due to conflict of interests. Robinson commented in his memoir that he was surprised that Mandelson did not declare a conflict of interest due to links between Robinson and Maxwell and stated he should have faced up to it, and in trying to escape from the scandal, blamed him. Robinson had dealings with Maxwell's engineering companies but was not alleged to be involved in any of the embezzlement of pension funds. Robinson stated there were rumours of documents being stolen and efforts to retrieve them, but that ultimately he did not know who released the details of their loan.
The article was published in The Guardian on 22 December 1998, followed by Mandelson going on a press tour immediately after on 22  December as a means of trying to salvage his position and minimise the damage done by the Guardian article, which ultimately was fruitless. On the morning of 23 December, Gordon Brown called Robinson and stated the bottom line was that Mandelson was to resign, and that Tony Blair demanded Robinson resign as well. Blair later called Robinson, according to Robinson, stating that he was very disappointed the press saw a scandal in what he saw as a "private arrangement". Mandelson had not declared the loan in the Register of Members' Interests, and had kept the loan from Blair for 2 years. He resigned on 23 December 1998, stating in a private letter to Blair that "I am sorry about this situation. But we came to power promising to uphold the highest possible standards in public life. We have not just to do so, but we must be seen to do so. Therefore with huge regret I wish to resign. I will always be a loyal Labour man and I am not prepared to see the party and the government suffer the kind of attack this issue has provoked. You can be assured, of course, of my continuing friendship and total loyalty."
Robinson stated in conclusion in his memoir that Mandelson had sold the house "for a handsome profit" and had repaid the loan on the home by 2001.
Mandelson had also not declared the loan to his lender (the Britannia Building Society) although they decided not to take any action, with the CEO stating: "I am satisfied that the information given to us at the time of the mortgage application was accurate." Mandelson initially thought he could weather the press storm, but had to resign when it became clear that Blair thought nothing else would clear the air. In October 2000, it was reported that Robinson had "accused Peter Mandelson of lying to the Commons about the home loan affair that cost both of them their government jobs."
Later, it emerged that while in the role, Mandelson urged Blair to proceed with the rollout of the system which later metastasised into the Horizon IT scandal arguing that it was "only sensible choice".


=== Secretary of State for Northern Ireland ===
Mandelson was out of the Cabinet for ten months. In October 1999 he was appointed Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, replacing Mo Mowlam. In his first speech in the post he mistakenly referred to himself as the "Secretary of State for Ireland". During his tenure he oversaw the creation of the devolved legislative assembly and power-sharing executive and reform of the Police Service of Northern Ireland.
On 24 January 2001, Mandelson resigned from the Government for a second time, following accusations of using his position to influence a passport application, stating "I would only ask people to understand that my sole desire and motivation throughout was to emphasise that I had not sought to influence the decision on naturalisation in any way at all, merely to pass on a request for information and the prime minister is entirely satisfied with this." He had contacted Home Office Minister Mike O'Brien on behalf of Srichand Hinduja, an Indian businessman who was seeking British citizenship and whose family firm was to become the main sponsor of the "Faith Zone" in the Millennium Dome. At the time Hinduja and his brothers were under investigation by the Indian Government for alleged involvement in the Bofors scandal. Mandelson insisted he had done nothing wrong and was exonerated by an independent inquiry by Sir Anthony Hammond, which concluded that neither Mandelson nor anyone else had acted improperly.
At the 2001 general election Mandelson was challenged by Arthur Scargill of the Socialist Labour Party and by John Booth, a former Labour Party press officer standing as "Genuine Labour", but Mandelson was re-elected with a large majority. In his victory speech, Mandelson said: "It was said that I was facing political oblivion ... Well, they underestimated Hartlepool and they underestimated me because I am a fighter and not a quitter." His quote would later be referenced by Liz Truss towards the end of her notably short tenure as prime minister in October 2022.


=== Stepping down as MP ===
Despite Labour's victory at the June 2001 general election, a third Cabinet appointment did not materialise and Mandelson indicated his interest in becoming the United Kingdom's European Commissioner when the new Commission was established in 2004. Both of Britain's Commissioners, Neil Kinnock and Chris Patten, were due to stand down. Appointment as a European Commissioner would require his resignation from Parliament, precipitating a by-election in his Hartlepool constituency. His EC appointment was announced in the summer and on 8 September 2004 Mandelson resigned his seat by petitioning to become Steward of the Manor of Northstead. Labour held the seat at the 2004 Hartlepool by-election with a much-reduced majority of 2,033 votes (equating to 40.7% of the vote), being succeeded by Iain Wright as MP for Hartlepool.


=== European Commissioner ===

On 22 November 2004, Mandelson became Britain's European Commissioner, taking the trade portfolio.
During the summer of 2008, Mandelson had a widely publicised disagreement with Nicolas Sarkozy, President of France. Sarkozy accused him of trying to sell out European farmers and appeared to blame his handling of the Doha round of trade talks for the "no" vote in the Irish referendum on the Treaty of Lisbon.  Mandelson said his position at world trade talks had been undermined and told the BBC he did not start the row, saying, "I stood up for myself, I'm not to be bullied." He said he believed the row was over but renewed his warnings on protectionism.
In October 2008 he left his post as Trade Commissioner to return to UK politics.


==== Inappropriate links ====
On 22 April 2005, The Times revealed that Mandelson had spent the previous New Year's Eve on the yacht of Paul Allen, the co-founder of Microsoft, which was at the centre of a major EU investigation and although it did not allege impropriety, it did state that Mandelson's visit was inappropriate for a serving European Commissioner.
In 2006, The Daily Mail reported that Mandelson had received a free cruise on a yacht from Diego Della Valle, a controversial Italian mogul, raising questions as Della Valle's businesses (such as luxury shoe brand Tod's) benefited from tariffs imposed shortly thereafter by Mandelson as EU Trade Commissioner on Chinese shoes.
In October 2008, Mandelson was the subject of much press speculation when it was revealed that British-born Canadian financier Nathaniel Rothschild, 5th Baron Rothschild and the Russian oligarch Oleg Deripaska had met Mandelson when staying on a yacht moored near Corfu, in order to attend a party held by Rothschild. After speculation that this might constitute a conflict of interest for Mandelson, Rothschild wrote a letter to The Times newspaper alleging that another guest was ConservativeShadow Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne, who, he said, illicitly tried to solicit a donation from the Russian for his party.
In October 2008, Mandelson was reported to have maintained private contacts over several years with Deripaska, most recently on holiday in August 2008 on Deripaska's yacht at Taverna Agni on the Greek island of Corfu. News of the contacts sparked criticism because, as European Union Trade Commissioner, Mandelson had been responsible for two decisions to cut aluminium tariffs that had benefited Deripaska's United Company Rusal. Mandelson denied that there had been a conflict of interest and said that he had never discussed aluminium tariffs with Deripaska. On 26 October 2008 the Shadow Foreign Secretary William Hague said the "whole country" wanted "transparency" about Mandelson's previous meetings with Deripaska. In response, Prime Minister Gordon Brown said Mandelson's dealings with Deripaska had been "found to be above board". Mandelson said that meeting business figures from "across the range" in emerging economies was part of his brief as EU Trade Commissioner. On 29 October 2008, while Mandelson was on a ministerial visit to Moscow, it was alleged in the British press that Valery Pechenkin, the head of security at Deripaska's company Basic Element, had organised a swift entry visa for Mandelson when he turned up in Moscow to visit Deripaska in 2005.


==== Alleged influence of pension ====
As a former EU Commissioner, Mandelson became entitled to a £31,000 pension upon reaching the age of 65 years. It was reported by Christopher Hope of The Daily Telegraph in 2009 that Mandelson's pension was contingent on a "duty of loyalty to the Communities", which also applied after his term in office. The TaxPayers' Alliance, which was reported to have uncovered the threat to his pension, demanded that he should declare the conflict of interest and either relinquish his EU pay cheques or resign as a minister. "When one considers that his new ministerial post deals specifically with business, enterprise and regulatory reform – all areas that are intimately involved with EU legislation, regulation and policy –" the group said, "the conflict of interest is even more stark." Mandelson did not agree that he had a conflict of interests. "He has always had a clear view of British interests and how they are secured by our EU membership," a spokesperson said.
The website Full Fact reported in 2019 that the claim was incorrect, stating that while there are rules governing the conduct of current and former EU staff members, which can lead to pensions sanctions, the European Commission had informed them that it would be "probably impossible" for such people to lose their pension for criticising the EU or supporting Brexit. Full Fact also pointed out that there had been multiple cases of both current and ex-commissioners criticising the EU – in April 2019, German former Commissioner Günter Verheugen criticised the EU's Brexit negotiating position, saying "the problem is on the EU side", while in 2017 British former Commissioner Lord Hill had supported "getting on" with Brexit.


=== Peerage and return to Cabinet ===

On 3 October 2008, as part of Gordon Brown's Cabinet reshuffle it was announced, amid some controversy and surprise, that Mandelson would return to Government in the re-designated post of Business Secretary and would be raised to the peerage, thus becoming a member of the House of Lords. His return surprised many due to his long-standing political rivalry with Brown. On 13 October 2008 he was created Baron Mandelson, of Foy in the County of Herefordshire and of Hartlepool in the County of Durham, being introduced in the House of Lords the same day. Following his return to office, Mandelson supported the planned Heathrow expansion. On 6 March 2009, environmental protester Leila Deen of anti-aviation group Plane Stupid approached him outside a summit on the government's low carbon industrial strategy and threw a cup of green custard in his face in protest over his support for a third runway at Heathrow Airport. The protester was cautioned on 9 April for causing "harassment, alarm or distress".
In a Cabinet reshuffle on 5 June 2009 Mandelson was appointed Lord President of the Council with the honorary title of First Secretary of State; it was also announced that the Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills would be merged into his, affording him the new title of Secretary of State for Business, Innovation and Skills and that he would continue as President of the Board of Trade. Mandelson was a member of 35 of the 43 Cabinet committees and subcommittees.
In August 2009, Mandelson was widely reported to have ordered "technical measures" such as internet disconnection to be included in the draft of the Digital Economy Act 2010 after a "big lobbying operation", even though the Digital Britain report had rejected this type of punishment. The Independent reported that according to their Whitehall sources, Mandelson was persuaded that tough laws were needed to reduce online copyright infringement following an intensive lobbying campaign by influential people in the music and film industry. The paper also reported that this included a meeting with DreamWorks co-founder David Geffen at the Rothschild family villa on the Greek island of Corfu. Mandelson's spokesperson claimed that there had been no discussion of internet piracy during the Corfu dinner and suggested that the decision to reverse Lord Carter's findings had been taken in late July before the trip. The Times reported after the Corfu meeting that an unnamed Whitehall source had confirmed that before this trip, Mandelson had shown little personal interest in the Digital Britain agenda, which has been ongoing for several years. According to the source of The Times, Mandelson returned from holiday and effectively issued an edict that the regulation needed to be tougher.
In August 2011, a Freedom of Information (FOI) request showed that Mandelson had decided to approve the inclusion of technical measures, such as the disconnection of internet access, at least two months before public consultation had finished and that he had shown little interest in the consultation. Letters from Mandelson's office document talks with Sir Lucian Grainge, CEO of Universal Music Group, on 2 June 2009 and that on the following day Mandelson advised Lord Carter about the "possibility of [the Secretary of State] having a power to direct OfCom to go directly to introduce technical measures". Mandelson made the formal announcement that technical measures, including disconnection, were to be included in the Digital Economy Bill two months later on 7 August 2009.
An opinion poll conducted by the centre-left think tank Compass found in March 2009 that Mandelson was less disliked by Labour Party members than Deputy Leader Harriet Harman. This was felt to be unusual as Mandelson "historically has been unpopular among Labour members". Blair's assertion in 1996, namely that "my project will be complete when the Labour Party learns to love Peter Mandelson", was seen as prophetic in late September 2009 when Mandelson was enthusiastically received at the party conference in Brighton. While Business Secretary, he was accused of inserting "technical measures" for online copyright infringement into the Digital Economy Act following lobbying from the music and film industry.


=== Post-Cabinet ===


==== Advisory, lobbying and directorships ====
In November 2010, Mandelson and Ben Wegg-Prosser founded Global Counsel, a London-based lobbying firm with the financial support of WPP, the advertising giant. The firm provides advice for corporate strategists and senior management worldwide. Lord Mandelson has been criticised for not revealing his clientele. As a corporate lobbyist, he personally helped clients such as Shein, Shell, Palantir, Alibaba, TikTok, and the UK private water industry obtain meetings with ministers and senior officials.
In May 2012, Mandelson confirmed that he was advising Asia Pulp & Paper (APP) in selling timber products to Europe. In 2012 APP was accused of illegal logging in Indonesia and damaging the habitats of rare animals such as the Sumatran tiger. At least 67 companies worldwide, such as Tesco and Kraft Foods since 2004 and Danone since 2012 have boycotted APP. In April 2014, it was reported that Mandelson had strong ties to Russian conglomerate Sistema. Mandelson was criticised for being a member of the House of Lords while running a lobbying firm. In 2021, he was the only Labour peer to vote against an amendment denouncing genocide in Xinjiang.
Mandelson served as a senior adviser to the advisory investment banking firm, Lazard, from January 2011 until March 2022. In 2013, Mandelson also joined the Board of Trustees of Deutsche Bank's Alfred Herrhausen Gesellschaft.


==== Political activities and views ====
After Labour lost the 2010 general election and the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition was formed, Mandelson's memoirs, The Third Man: Life at the Heart of New Labour, were published in July 2010. The memoirs were criticised by Labour leadership contenders Ed and David Miliband, and by Andy Burnham. During this time, he was appointed president of the international think tank Policy Network.
In 1999, 2008, 2009, 2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014, Mandelson was an invited guest of the Bilderberg Group and attended the annual conferences. In May 2011, there was speculation that Mandelson had been approached by China to be a candidate for the leadership of the International Monetary Fund, even though he had not served as a finance minister or headed a central bank. It was then speculated in March 2012 that Mandelson's name might be put forward to succeed Pascal Lamy as Director-General of the World Trade Organisation, backed by David Cameron.
In June 2013, writing for the Progress website, Mandelson warned Labour it risked harming its election chances if affiliated trade unions continued to "manipulate parliamentary selections" as was alleged in the 2013 Labour Party Falkirk candidate selection controversy. 

After the 2015 Labour leadership election resulted in Jeremy Corbyn becoming the party leader, Mandelson stated that he believed that Labour was now unelectable, but advised party members unhappy with the situation to wait for Corbyn to demonstrate this before working to replace him. He wished for an early general election to force Corbyn out. In February 2017, he said Corbyn had "no idea in the 21st century how to conduct himself as a leader of a party putting itself forward in a democratic election" and "I work every single day to bring forward the end of [Corbyn's] tenure in office". After the results of the 2017 general election became known, Mandelson conceded that Corbyn's election campaign was "very sure-footed" and the result, in which Labour gained seats and denied the Conservatives a majority, unexpected. "I was wrong" about Corbyn, he told BBC News. "I am very surprised, an earthquake has happened in British politics and I did not foresee it", although he doubted Corbyn's ability to gain a Commons majority. Two years later, at the 2019 general election, Labour suffered their worst defeat since the 1930s. Mandelson described the result as "not undeserved", arguing that Corbyn's leadership was one of the main reasons for Labour's defeat.
During the 2016 EU referendum, Mandelson sat on the board of Britain Stronger in Europe, the official "Remain" campaign, which was unsuccessful. Following the Brexit referendum, Mandelson was an outspoken advocate for a second referendum. After Roberto Azevêdo announced he would step down as Director-General of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in September 2020, Mandelson declared an interest in succeeding him. He proceeded to lobby governments around the world for the role, arguing that the WTO had "reached a fork in the road" and had to be "picked up and put back on its feet". Mandelson, an opponent of Brexit, was overlooked in favour of the Conservative Liam Fox: his prospective candidacy ceased when Fox secured the UK Government's nomination.
After the 2020 Labour leadership election resulted in Keir Starmer becoming the party leader, it was reported the following year that Mandelson had been advising Starmer on moving the party beyond Corbyn's leadership and broadening its electoral appeal. In 2023, Mandelson was one of the regular guests of the weekly podcast How To Win An Election from The Times, presented by Matt Chorley and alongside Polly Mackenzie and Danny Finkelstein. With a history of involvement in Labour campaigns stretching back to the 1987 general election, Mandelson wrote in a 2022 foreword that he expected the next election to be a "battle for change". As early as September 2022, Mandelson publicly advised Starmer to not "sit back" and assume victory, but instead push for significant change to win a commanding majority. He was described as having a "significant influence" on Starmer's office as a "core part" of his political network, and was an adviser to Starmer for several years before Labour's 2024 general election victory. In the lead-up to the election in June 2024, Mandelson warned against public overconfidence in a Labour victory, echoing a strategy used by Blair before the 1997 election. Appearing on the BBC, he stated, "I don't believe the polls for one moment". Mandelson also publicly campaigned for Labour by reassuring voters that the party had changed under Starmer and was a "safe" option for government after years of Conservative rule. Speaking before the election, he correctly predicted a public appetite for change that would lead to a Labour victory, similar to the major political shifts seen in 1979 and 1997.


==== Ambassadorship to the United States ====

In December 2024, Mandelson was nominated as HM Ambassador to the United States by Starmer, to replace Karen Pierce who had been rotated out of her post as the UK's ambassador to the US and appointed as the Prime Minister's Special Envoy to the Western Balkans. As a veteran on trade issues, Mandelson's appointment was aimed at helping the UK secure trade opportunities with the US. He assumed office of the ambassadorship on 10 February 2025, following the presidential transition from Joe Biden to that of Donald Trump.
Upon appointment, he said: "It is a great honour to serve the country in this way. We face challenges in Britain but also big opportunities and it will be a privilege to work with the government to land those opportunities, both for our economy and our nation's security, and to advance our historic alliance with the United States."
Previously opposed to Trump and describing him as "little short of a white nationalist and racist", "reckless and a danger to the world" likening him to "a bully", Mandelson revised his opinion, publicly asserting his respect for Trump, according to the will of the people.  Trump had appeared to enjoy a warm relationship with Mandelson, praising him during an Oval Office meeting in May 2025.  In December 2024, a Trump campaign adviser publicly referred to Mandelson as an "absolute moron".
During his short tenure as British ambassador, Mandelson focused on promoting trade and fostering relationships with the US government during Trump's second presidency. Mandelson played a significant role in helping to formulate the details of a trade deal between the two countries following Trump enacting a series of steep tariffs affecting nearly all goods imported into the country, which was praised as a key achievement of his ambassadorship. Appointed just before Trump's return to the White House in January 2025, Mandelson was tasked with managing the crucial UK–US "special relationship". He worked to build connections within the new administration, including meetings with Trump himself. Mandelson's role involved strengthening the historic alliance between the two nations, particularly regarding economic growth and security.


===== Dismissal amid scandal surrounding Jeffrey Epstein association =====

In September 2025, controversy emerged in the United Kingdom over the long-standing association between Mandelson and American financier and sex offender Jeffrey Epstein, which ultimately led to Mandelson's dismissal as the British Ambassador to the United States. Their friendship spanned at least from 2002 to 2011, continuing even after Epstein's first conviction in 2008. While their friendship had been public knowledge for some time, a fresh wave of scrutiny and public outrage erupted following the release of U.S. court documents and a cache of private emails between the two men by the U.S. House Oversight Committee.

The released documents revealed the depth and nature of their relationship, particularly after Epstein's 2008 conviction in Florida for soliciting prostitution from a minor. Among the most damaging revelations were a 2003 "birthday book" message where Mandelson called Epstein his "best pal," and emails from 2008 where he expressed support for Epstein, told him he "thought the world of him," and advised him to "fight for early release" from his 18-month sentence. It also emerged that Epstein had paid for Mandelson's travel in 2003 and that Mandelson had reportedly sought Epstein's help with a banking deal while serving as a UK cabinet minister in 2010.
The new revelations placed immense pressure on Starmer, who had appointed Mandelson as US Ambassador in late 2024 and initially expressed full confidence in him. Starmer's government claimed that the newly published emails provided "materially different" information about the extent of the relationship, specifically Mandelson's suggestion that Epstein's conviction was wrongful. After Mandelson refused to resign, Starmer sacked him, stating he found the emails "reprehensible" and his responses to official questions unsatisfactory. Mandelson for his part expressed deep regret for the association and "profound sympathy" for Epstein's victims, claiming he was "taken in" by a "charismatic criminal liar".
After being dismissed from the role in September 2025, Mandelson said: "Being Ambassador here has been the privilege of my life. I could not have wished for a better welcome by you all, a better introduction to the job or better support while here. Your professionalism has been superb, more so than I have experienced in any public role. For this I thank you from the bottom of my heart. The relationship between Britain and the United States of America is a unique one. I know that you will continue to serve and deepen that relationship from DC right across our brilliant network. I wish to thank you for all of your efforts in serving me as your Ambassador." James Roscoe, deputy head of mission at the British embassy in Washington since 2022, was appointed interim ambassador following Mandelson's dismissal.


== Personal life ==
Mandelson is gay and said to be "intensely private" about his personal life. Mandelson considers himself a good role model for gay people because of his success in public office. Having lived in London with Reinaldo Avila da Silva, a Brazilian translator, since March 1998, Mandelson wed his partner on 28 October 2023. The couple have a collie dog named Jock, who became popular at parties in the British ambassador's residence during his tenure in the ambassadorial office.
In 2008 Mandelson was hospitalised, suffering from a kidney stone. At this time, melamine added to milk in China had caused kidney stones and other ailments in thousands of Chinese children, killing at least six. During the previous week, Mandelson had drunk a glass of Chinese yoghurt in front of reporters in order to show his confidence in Chinese dairy products, although his own kidney stones were unrelated.
Mandelson was guest of honour in 2011 at Herbert Morrison Primary School in Vauxhall, South London, which was hosting a special themed day in honour of Mandelson's grandfather Herbert, after whom the school was named.


=== Attempted outings and harassment ===
While his sexual orientation was known to friends, colleagues and constituents, in 1987 the News of the World ran an issue that attempted to out Mandelson as gay. Mandelson did not respond. Mandelson was outed again by Matthew Parris in 1998 on the BBC programme Newsnight. This led to press harassment of his partner, with the Daily Express sending a reporter to take pictures of him while he was at his languages course.
An internal investigation later found that the photos had been obtained without Avila da Silva's consent and images of him attempting to cover his face had been secretly deleted. Mandelson phoned the BBC and the Press Complaints Commission following Newsnight's broadcast, and an internal memo was later sent within the BBC, stating: "under no circumstances whatsoever should allegations about the private life of Peter Mandelson be repeated or referred to on any broadcast."


== Honorary roles ==
Mandelson served, until 8 October 2008, as President of the Central School of Speech and Drama.
In 2013 Mandelson was appointed to the revived post of High Steward of Hull, an ancient ceremonial position held by his grandfather in 1956–65 and defunct since 1974. In September 2025, following the Epstein revelations, he was stripped of the role.
Mandelson served as Chancellor of Manchester Metropolitan University from 2016 to 2024. In September 2025, following the Epstein revelations, the university rescinded his honorary doctorate and commemorative medal.
Finishing fourth out of thirty-eight candidates, Mandelson contested the 2024 University of Oxford Chancellor election,  which Lord Hague won.
In November 2025, following the Epstein revelations, Mandelson resigned as an honorary fellow of his alma mater, St. Catherine's College, Oxford.


== In the media ==
BBC Four's Storyville in 2010, Mandelson: The Real PM?, directed by Hannah Rothschild, a fly-on-the-wall documentary about Mandelson as Business Secretary in the run up to the 2010 general election.
Mandelson was portrayed by Paul Rhys in the 2003 Channel 4 drama The Deal.
Mandelson was portrayed by Mark Gatiss in the 2015 Channel 4 drama Coalition.
Mandelson was portrayed by Nigel Planer in the 2011 comedy drama The Hunt for Tony Blair.
The Little Britain character Sebastian Love was based on Mandelson.


== Honours ==
 Appointed as a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council (1998)
 UK Baron (2008)
 Grand Officer, Order of the Star of Italy (2016)
 Officer, Légion d'honneur (2017)
Received the Honorary Degree of Doctor of Letters (D.Litt) from Manchester Metropolitan University (13 June 2016, revoked on 12 September 2025)
Freedom of the Borough of Hartlepool (12 March 2010, revoked on 2 October 2025)


== Bibliography ==
(with Roger Liddle) The Blair Revolution: Can New Labour Deliver? Faber, 1996 ISBN 978-0571178186
The Blair Revolution Revisited, (2nd ed), Politicos, 2002, ISBN 978-1842750391
(contrib.) The City in Europe and the World, European Research Forum at London Metropolitan University, 2006 ISBN 978-0954744816
The Third Man: Life at the Heart of New Labour Harper Press, 2010 ISBN 978-0007395286


=== Works ===
Mandelson, Peter (1997): Labour's next steps, Fabian Society
Mandelson, Peter (2002): The Blair Revolution Revisited Politico's, ISBN 1-84275-039-9
Mandelson, Peter (2010). The Third Man: Life at the Heart of New Labour. HarperPress. ISBN 978-0007395286.


== Notes ==


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Jones, Nicholas (2000): Sultans of Spin: The Media and the New Labour Government Orion Books, ISBN 0-7528-2769-3
Macintyre, Donald (1999): Mandelson: The Biography HarperCollins, ISBN 0-00-255943-9
Mandelson, Peter (2010): The Third Man. Life at the Heart of New Labour. London: HarperPress. ISBN 978-0-00-739528-6
Radice, Giles (2010). Trio: Inside the Blair, Brown, Mandelson Project. London: IB Tauris. ISBN 978-1-84885-445-1.
Rawnsley, Andrew (2001): Servants of the People: The Inside Story of New Labour Penguin Books, ISBN 0-14-027850-8
Routledge, Paul (1999): Mandy: The Unauthorised Biography of Peter Mandelson Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0-684-85175-X
Seldon, Anthony (2005): Blair The Free Press, ISBN 0-7432-3212-7


== External links ==

Lord Mandelson, former MP – They Work For You
Peter Mandelson profile at UK Parliament
Peter Mandelson | Financial Times
Policy Network
Profile: Peter Mandelson BBC News, 3 October 2008, 13 August 2004
Peter Mandelson: Interview in full, PublicAffairsAsia.com, 18 August 2008, on sovereign wealth funds
Peter Mandelson: Interview on New Statesman, 1 October 2008.
Appearances on C-SPAN
Peter Mandelson   on Charlie Rose
Social Democracy Observatory
Peter Mandelson at IMDb
Peter Mandelson collected news and commentary at The Guardian 
Peter Mandelson collected news and commentary at The New York Times