Phillip Gallagher (born 3 March 1977) is a British children's television presenter who is best known for playing the title character in the CBeebies children's television show Mister Maker.


== Early life ==
Gallagher attended Rainham Mark Grammar School in Rainham, Kent, and Canterbury Christ Church University. 


== Career ==
Gallagher started his career as presenter and sports reporter on BBC Radio Kent. He was a performer and puppeteer on Playhouse Disney and also provided characters and voices for Studio Disney.
From 2003 until 2005, Gallagher presented Diggin' It on GMTV. During 2006, he was a regular character on Mighty Truck of Stuff as 'Pablo', and was also the voice-over for Channel 4's Unanimous.
Gallagher has appeared as the title character in Mister Maker since 2007. He also appeared in 2 episodes of Bear Behaving Badly as the Robot Rat Catcher and the Mummy. Since 2009, he has also played the role of 'Mr Liker Biker' in Grandpa in My Pocket.
Gallagher often performs in pantomimes. In 2006, he appeared as Wishee Washee in Aladdin at the Theatre Royal in Winchester. In 2007, he appeared as Silly Billy (Jack's brother) in Jack and the Beanstalk, again at the Theatre Royal in Winchester. In 2008, he appeared as Buttons in Cinderella at the Opera House, Buxton, Derbyshire. In 2009 he played alongside George Takei in the title role of Aladdin at the Central Theatre in Chatham, Kent, and in 2011 as Muddles in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs in St Albans with Toyah Willcox who played the Evil Queen. In 2013, he returned to Jack and the Beanstalk, playing Billy Trot in a production at the Marlowe Theatre, Canterbury alongside Samantha Womack.
In 2009, Gallagher was nominated for the BAFTA Children's Awards as Best Presenter for his role in Mister Maker.
In 2021, a rumour arose on TikTok indicating that 'Mister Maker' (the character he played in the children's television show of the same name) had died. The initial confusion came from fans mixing up Phil Gallagher with another presenter called Mark Speight who hosted SMart. Gallagher has a TikTok account named "mistermakerofficial".


== Filmography ==


== References ==