The Philippines national football team (Filipino: Pambansang koponan ng futbol ng Pilipinas) represents the Philippines in men's international football, governed by the Philippine Football Federation (PFF) and has been playing internationally since 1913.
Prior to World War II, the Philippines had regularly competed with Japan and the Republic of China in the Far Eastern Championship Games. So far, the national team has never qualified for the FIFA World Cup and has qualified for the AFC Asian Cup only once, in 2019. They finished second at the 2014 AFC Challenge Cup after losing to Palestine in the final.
Unlike most of Southeast Asia, where football is the most popular sport, the Philippines' most popular sports are basketball and boxing, inherited from American rule. Before 2010, the Philippines would suffer group stage eliminations at the AFF Championship.
However, since the 2010 AFF Championship, which saw the "Miracle of Hanoi", the country has attempted to develop football as part of the sport's renaissance, finding more incentives to increase football development and fan support.


== History ==


=== 1910s–1940s: Early years ===

The Philippines participated in the Far Eastern Championship Games, which included football. The first edition was in 1913 and the last was in 1934. The games were the first regional football tournament for national teams outside the British Home Championship. The national team routinely faced Japan and China and at one edition the Dutch East Indies at the games. The Philippines won over China at the inaugural tournament with a scoreline of 2–1. During the 1917 edition, the national team achieved its biggest win in international football. Led by Filipino-Spanish icon Paulino Alcantara, the Philippines defeated Japan 15–2.
After the dissolution of the Far Eastern Championship Games, the national squad participated in the 1940 East Asian Games organized to commemorate the 2600th anniversary of the foundation of the Empire of Japan by Emperor Jimmu. The team finished third behind champions Japan and second placers Manchukuo, and ahead of the Republic of China.


=== 1950s–1990s: Decline of football ===
In the 1950s the Philippines hosted friendlies with international-based sides, However, the national team experienced lack of funding and barely received any coverage from the media. During that time talents from the national team were drawn from the Manila Football League which received substantial support from the Chinese-Filipino community. The national team's decent performance at the 1958 Asian Games, hosted in Tokyo, where they defeated Japan 1–0, was labeled as an upset by the Japanese press.
The years following 1958 saw the decline of Philippine football, as several key players resigned from the national team due to financial challenges for playing. National team players Ed Ocampo and Eduardo Pacheco switched to basketball, and went on playing for commercial basketball clubs where players are paid. The Philippine Congress passed Republic Act 3135 that revised the charter of the Philippine Amateur Athletic Federation, which had a provision, or a 60-40 rule, that mandated teams to not have more than 40 percent Chinese and other players with foreign blood. Sponsors withdrew and leagues, which were mostly funded by the Chinese-Filipino community, started to decline. The 60–40 rule was lifted much later during the tenure of president Johnny Romualdez of the Philippine Football Federation (PFF), after 1982 when the PFA had reorganized itself as the PFF.
The national team suffered defeats with big margins at the 1962 Asian Games in Jakarta. This includes the national team's record 15–1 defeat to Malaysia, which became the worst defeat of the national team at that time. The record was later broken by the 15–0 loss to Japan in 1967 at the qualifiers for the 1968 Summer Olympics. Foreigners were hired to serve as head coaches for the national team in an attempt to reduce big margin loses. Englishman Allan Rogers was hired following the record defeat to Malaysia, and Spaniard Juan Cutillas was likewise tasked to lead the national team following the record defeat to Japan.
In the early sixties, the Philippine Football Association partnered with the San Miguel Corporation to seek foreign assistance to train local football players and coaches and to develop the sport in the country. These included Alan Rogers and Brian Birch, coaches from the United Kingdom. After the two were relieved, Danny McClellan and Graham Adams continued their task. In 1961, San Miguel, through the national football association, brought in four medical students from Spain who were experts in football — Francisco Escarte, Enrique dela Mata, Claudio Sanchez and Juan Cutillas. Escarte and dela Mata left the country after one year.
In 1971, head coach Juan Cutillas recruited five foreign players to play for the national team: four Spaniards and one Chinese. The national team joined several international competitions such as the Merdeka Tournament, Jakarta Anniversary Tournament and the President Park Tournament. The team caused some upset results against the national teams of Thailand, Singapore and South Korea. The national team saw another decline after the four Spanish players left the team due to financial reasons and basketball gained more foothold over football in the country.
The national team under German head coach Eckhard Krautzun finished fourth overall at the 1991 Southeast Asian Games, its best ever finish at the tournament. The Philippines dealt a 1–0 defeat to defending champions Malaysia at the tournament which knocked out the latter out of the tournament at just the group stage. Norman Fegidero scored the sole goal for the Philippines.


=== 2000s ===
In September 2006, the country fell to 195th on the FIFA World Rankings, its lowest ever.  By the end of the year, the Philippines moved back up to 171st overall, after a good run in the 2007 AFF Championship qualification.  They were able to win three games in a row, which was a first for the Philippines and thus qualifying for the 2007 AFF Championship. Coach at that time Aris Caslib, aimed to reach the semifinals with two wins at the group stage.  The decision came despite Philippine Football Federation president Juan Miguel Romualdez stating that they would still be underdogs in the tournament and that they should not raise their expectations too high, as the Philippines have only gotten their first ever win of the tournament during the 2004 AFF Championship.
The Philippines eventually failed to reach their target, only getting a draw in three matches. Their poor performances led to Caslib's resignation, as well as the refusal of the PFF to register and enter the qualification stages for the 2010 FIFA World Cup.  They would be one of four nations, all from Southeast Asia, not to enter after a record number of entries.  However, it was revealed that the decision not to enter the 2010, as well as the 2006 World Cup qualification, was made during the PFF presidency of Rene Adad, whose term ended in 2003.  Instead, the PFF wanted to focus on domestic and regional competitions.
The Philippines failed to qualify for any major competition in 2008. They missed out on the 2008 AFC Challenge Cup only on goal difference, and the 2008 AFF Championship with an inferior goals scored record.

Dan Palami, businessman and sports patron, was appointed as team manager of the national team in 2009 by the Philippine Football Federation. The national team still received minimal support from the government. Palami made financial investments into the team using his own personal money. Since taking responsibility over the national team, he envisioned a plan named Project 100, which aimed to make the team among the top 100 national teams in the world in terms of FIFA rankings. More foreign-born Filipinos were called up to play for the national squad.


=== 2010s: Era of renaissance ===

The Philippines's campaign at the 2010 AFF Championship under Simon McMenemy's tenure was a breakthrough. Holding a primal ticket as one of two teams along with Laos that had to qualify for the tournament, the Philippines advanced from the group stage for the first time, did not concede a single defeat, and their win against defending champions Vietnam in particular was considered one of the biggest upsets in the tournament's history. The match, which would later be referred by local Filipino fans as the "Miracle of Hanoi", is also considered the match that started a football renaissance in the country where basketball is the more popular sport. In the knockout stage, they had to play both their designated home and away games against Indonesia in Jakarta due to the unavailability of a stadium that passes AFF standards. The Philippines lost both games to end their campaign.
The following year, Michael Weiß became the head coach. The national team managed to qualify for the 2012 edition of the AFC Challenge Cup, the first time since qualifiers were introduced and also recorded their first ever victory in the FIFA World Cup qualification, beating Sri Lanka 4–0 in the second leg of the first preliminary round. Kuwait finished the Philippines' World Cup qualification campaign after winning over them twice in the second round.
In 2012, the Philippines qualified for the semifinals of the AFC Challenge Cup for the first time winning over former champions India and Tajikistan, though they lost 2–1 against Turkmenistan in the semifinal. In the third place-playoff the Philippines won 4–3 over Palestine. The Philippines won the 2012 Philippine Peace Cup, a friendly tournament hosted at home, which was their first title since the 1913 Far Eastern Games. At the 2012 AFF Championship, the Philippines replicated their performance in 2010 by advancing to the semifinal. They lost to Singapore on aggregate by a single goal in the two-legged semifinal.

The Philippines reached the final of the 2014 AFC Challenge Cup. With a berth to the 2015 AFC Asian Cup on the line, the Philippines lost to Palestine 1–0 on May 30. The Philippines once again advanced from the group stage at the 2014 AFF Championship by winning over Indonesia, the first time since the 1934 Far Eastern Games, and Laos despite their loss to Vietnam. The Philippines faced Thailand in the two-legged semifinal, coming up with a goalless draw against their opponents at home in Manila but losing the away match at Bangkok.
Thomas Dooley became the head coach of the national team. In October 2015 their 2–0 victory over Yemen in Doha, Qatar in the 2018 FIFA World Cup and 2019 AFC Asian Cup qualifiers was their first-ever World Cup qualifier victory away from home. Their campaign to qualify for the FIFA World Cup ended in the second round though they advance to the third round of the Asian Cup qualifiers.

In late 2016 the Philippines jointly hosted the group stage of the AFF Championship with Myanmar though they fail to progress from the group stage like they did in the past three editions.Though the national team failed to qualify for the 2018 FIFA World Cup in Russia, they secured qualification for 2019 AFC Asian Cup after defeating Tajikistan, 2–1 at home in their final qualifier match. In May 2018, the national team reached 111th rank in the FIFA World Ranking making it the highest rank that the team has.
The Philippines made its historic debut in the 2019 AFC Asian Cup with a 0–1 defeat to South Korea. then a 0–3 loss to China and was edged 1–3 by Kyrgyzstan, with Stephan Schröck scoring a historic goal for the Azkals in the tournament.


=== 2020–present ===
Following a relatively successful debut in the Asian Cup, the Philippines began their 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification where they were grouped together with Syria, China, Guam and Maldives. In their opening game, the Azkals met Syria at home and took an early lead, only to see the Syrians manage an outstanding comeback and smash the Azkals 5–2 in Bacolod. Following the crushing home defeat, the Pinoys regained its pace with two away wins over Guam and the Maldives. Between these matches, the Pinoys also hosted China at home where they acquired an encouraging goalless draw, after a splendid performance by the Azkals goalkeeper Neil Etheridge which increased the team's chance. However, the Syrians once again blew the chance of the Filipinos, with the Syrians emerging with a 1–0 win over the Azkals. When COVID-19 pandemic led the games to be postponed to 2021, the Philippines had to play in a centralised venue in Sharjah. The Filipinos then won against Guam 3–0, but lost 0–2 to China and thus did not manage to reach the 2022 FIFA World Cup, before ending the qualification with a 1–1 draw to the Maldives. Nonetheless, the third place in their group meant the Philippines qualified for the third round of 2023 AFC Asian Cup qualifiers.
At the third round of the 2023 AFC Asian Cup qualifiers in Ulaanbaatar, the Philippines managed to draw with Yemen 0–0 and defeat the hosts Mongolia 1–0 through a last-minute goal by debutant Gerrit Holtmann but were defeated 4–0 by eventual group winners Palestine. Despite finishing second in Group B, in which the five best runner-up teams across all the groups qualify for the tournament, the Azkals failed to qualify for the 2023 AFC Asian Cup after finishing as the worst runner-up.
Philippines then played in the second round of the 2026 FIFA World Cup qualification being place alongside Iraq and two regional rivals, Indonesia and Vietnam. The team the finished last in the table with 1 draw against Indonesia on November 21, 2023, and 5 losses.
Long-time general manager, Dan Palami stepped down from his role in January 2024. In 2024, Philippines was invited by Malaysia for the 2024 Merdeka Tournament in September and Thailand for the 2024 King's Cup in October. Philippines then played in the 2024 ASEAN Championship drawing 1–1 all their first group stage match against Myanmar, Laos and Vietnam. Needing a win in their final group stage fixtures against Indonesia, against all odds, Philippines went on to win 1–0 after Bjørn Martin Kristensen scored from the penalty spot to secure a spot in the semi-finals where the team didn't lose a game in the group stage. During the first leg of the semi-finals match on December 27 against Thailand, with the match coming to an end, Kike Linares scored in the 90+5' stoppage time header to secured a 2–1 win which then see Philippines beating Thailand for the first time in 52 years.


== Team image ==


=== Supporters ===
Some fans have organized themselves to support the national team, one of them is the Ultras Filipinas, which formed in 2011. The Kaholeros started out as a gathering of friends using Twitter calling for fans to watch games of the AFC Challenge Cup at the National Sports Grill in Greenbelt. The 'Ultras Filipinas' was established when fans of Philippine Air Force and 'Ultras Kayas' decided to form a support group for the national teams of the Philippines not necessarily just for the football team. The first outing of Ultras Filipinas was not for the national football team but for the national rugby union team. The two fan groups take alternative turns in cheering and chanting for the national team during games.


=== Colors ===

The traditional home kit is similar to the France national team; blue jersey, white shorts, and red socks.  However, in recent times, the home and away kit has either been all-blue, all-red or all-white, currently is the all-white as home jerseys. The current kit supplier of the national team is German sportswear Puma. Adidas, as well as Japanese company Mizuno, has provided kits for the team in the past.
Puma was the official outfitter of the national team during the 1996 AFC Asian Cup qualification. Later that year, Adidas assumed that role and outfitted the team that participated at the 1996 Tiger Cup.
For three years from March 2008, Mizuno served as the official outfitter and equipment supplier of the team. It also helped the national federation in its grassroots development program. On June 4, 2012, Puma supplanted Mizuno's role with the national team.
Local firm LGR Sportswear became the official kit provider of the national team in 2015 and a new set of kits made by LGR were unveiled to the public on June 5 which was later used by the team at the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualifiers. The home and away kits were white and blue respectively. Filipino weave design and the three stars and the sun are present at the back of the home and away kits. The goalkeeper's kit is black and has a yellow trim on the chest area and a weave pattern with the three stars and the sun and Azkals logo incorporated in the design, in front around the shoulder area. Adidas was also announced as the footwear sponsor of the team for the qualifiers.
Spanish sportswear brand Kelme became the official kit provider of the national team in 2021.
In June 2022, the team used Chronos Athletics-made kits when they competed in the third round of the 2023 AFC Asian Cup qualifiers in Mongolia. It was later explained that the Kelme kits they were supposed to wear arrived late.
Following Kelme's deal with the Philippines expiring in January 2023, local sportswear brand Chronos Athletics finally became the Philippines' new kit supplier. In March 2023, following a TikTok video that went viral, presenting a concept shirt for the Philippines. The management then decided to acquire the design made by JerseyBird, a small US-based sportswear brand. Chronos Athletics remained as the kit supplier, with both sides agreed to retain the JerseyBird logo on the kits and to be distributed under a subsidiary brand, Azkals Sportswear.
In the recent 2026 FIFA World Cup qualification match against Iraq, the Philippines were seen wearing a new kit design supplied by Puma. On May 3, 2024, Philippines announced a four-year partnership with Puma until 2028.


=== Names ===

Under the official FIFA Trigramme the team's name is abbreviated as PHI; this acronym is used by FIFA, the AFC and the AFF to identify the team in official competitions. The team is also identified under the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country code for the Philippines as PHL. However the team was more commonly known as the RP, the acronym for the country's official name, Republika ng Pilipinas, which the local press used when they referred to the team as the "RP Booters" or the "RP XI".  This was until late October 2010 when the Department of Foreign Affairs decided to change the official abbreviation of the country from "RP" to "PH" or "PHL", to be in line with ISO standards. The local press have since referred to the team as either "PH/PHL Booters" or "PH/PHL XI".
They were also known as the "Tri–Stars," which was derived from the three stars on the Philippine flag, although this nickname was not frequently used.
The national team was referred to as the "Azkals". The name was coined when an online Philippine football community proposed the nickname Calle Azul (Spanish for Streets of Blue, referring to the color of their kit) which was modified to Azul Calle, shortened to AzCal, and finally became Azkal – a word that is similar to Filipino term Askal meaning street dog. "Azkals" became a trending topic on Twitter during the semifinals of the 2010 AFF Championship. The name would be officially adopted by the PFF during the tenure of general team manager Dan Palami until 2023. Its discontinuation of its use by the federation was confirmed in February 2024. The Azkals name would be adopted by an independent 7-a-side club in 2024 competing in the 7's Football League led by Palami and former national team players. There are no serious efforts to replace the "Azkals" moniker as of December 2024.


=== Home stadium ===
During the early years of the Philippine national team, they played their home matches at the Manila Carnival Grounds. By 1934 it became the site of the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex. One of the facilities within the complex is the 12,000 capacity national stadium, known as the Rizal Memorial Track and Football Stadium or simply the Rizal Memorial Stadium.  Since its opening, it has been the home venue of the Philippine national team until May 2015 when they declared the 25,000 seater and Philippine Sports Stadium in Bocaue, Bulacan as their new home. However, due to disappointing attendance numbers in PSS and RMS and an impressive crowd for Ceres–Negros's run to the 2017 AFC Cup, the Philippine Football Federation decided to make Panaad Stadium the national team's home again for the 2019 AFC Asian Cup qualifiers.
The RMS has also become a hub for track and field. The continued use for athletics along with poor maintenance has deteriorated the stadium and the 1991 Southeast Asian Games was the last time it was used for international football matches.vIn early 2009, the Philippine Sports Commission planned to transform it to a modern football stadium which would make it usable by the national team for international matches.
The national team also held official international matches at the Cebu City Sports Center in Cebu City, and at the Barotac Nuevo Plaza Field in Barotac Nuevo, Iloilo.


== Results and fixtures ==

The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.
  Win
  Draw
  Loss
  Fixture


=== 2024 ===


=== 2025 ===


=== 2026 ===


== Technical staff ==


=== Current technical staff ===


=== Management ===


=== Coaching history ===

One of the earlier head coaches of the national team was Dionisio Calvo. Foreign coaches of American, Argentinean, English, German, Scottish, Spanish, and Swedish nationality have managed the national team. Juan Cutillas has managed the team in at least four non-consecutive tenures (1969–1978, 1981–1984, 1996–2000 and 2008–09).
Thomas Dooley led the national team to its best finish in a tournament sanctioned by the Asian Football Confederation and FIFA by leading the team to second place at the 2014 AFC Challenge Cup. The past three coaches, Simon McMenemy, Michael Weiß and Thomas Dooley, also made some strides at the regional level leading the team to the semifinals at the AFF Suzuki Cup (2010, 2012 and 2014 editions respectively), the top football tournament in Southeast Asia. Eckhard Krautzun also led the national team to the semifinals, its best finish at the 1991 Southeast Asian Games, before football became an under-23 tournament at said multi-sporting event.

Caretaker managers are listed in italics.


== Players ==


=== Current squad ===
The following 22 players were called up for the AFC Asian Cup qualifiers against Maldives.
Caps and goals updated as of November 18, 2025, after the match against Maldives.


=== Recent call-ups ===
The following players have been called up for the Philippines within the past 12 months.


== Player records ==

As of November 18, 2025
Players in bold are still active at international level.


=== Most appearances ===


=== Top goalscorers ===


== Competition records ==
For the head-to-head record of the national team against opposing nations, see the team's head-to-head record page.


=== FIFA World Cup ===
The Philippines has never qualified for the FIFA World Cup. The national team entered the 1950 FIFA World Cup qualification but withdrew without playing a single game. The Philippines had intended to enter the 1962 edition but did not push through with the plan. The country's entry to the 1966 edition was not accepted due to its association not being able to pay the registration fee for the qualifiers and the national team withdrew from the 1974 FIFA World Cup qualification just as they did in the 1950 qualifiers. The national team made its first participation in a FIFA World Cup qualifiers for the 1998 edition.
At the 2002 FIFA World Cup qualifiers, Yanti Barsales made the first goal for the Philippines at a FIFA World Cup qualifier against Syria.
The national team did not enter the qualifiers for the next succeeding editions until the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifiers, about 10 years later. The national team secured their first victory in a World Cup qualifier against Sri Lanka, 4–0.


=== Olympic Games ===


=== AFC Asian Cup ===

The Philippines qualified once for the Asian Cup, in 2019. For the 2011 and the 2015 AFC Asian Cup, the Philippines attempted to qualify for the tournament through the AFC Challenge Cup. The Philippines would have been invited to host the 1968 Asian Cup, a tournament in which it did not qualify for, if Iran withdrew as hosts.


=== Asian Games ===


=== AFC Challenge Cup ===
The AFC Challenge Cup was organized as a route for nations classified as "emerging" or "developing" as a sole route to qualify for the Asian Cup. The Philippines is among these nations
and participated at the inaugural 2006 AFC Challenge Cup. After a qualification phase was introduced the Philippines failed to qualify for the next two succeeding editions in 2008 and 2010. The Philippines qualified for the 2012 AFC Challenge Cup where they finished third. Phil Younghusband was the Golden Boot winner of the edition scoring six goals in the final tournament. The team reached the finals of 2014 edition of the tournament settling for second place after losing to Palestine in the finals. The AFC Challenge Cup tournament was dissolved after the 2014 edition.


=== Far Eastern Games ===
Out of the ten football tournaments held in ten editions of the Far Eastern Games, The Philippines only won the inaugural 1913 edition despite fielding American, Spanish and British players violating tournament rules in that edition. The team was nevertheless named champions. China was awarded champions of the nine other editions of the tournaments. At the 1917 Far Eastern Games, the Philippines recorded its biggest victory in an international match to date, which was the 15–2 win against Japan. FC Barcelona player Paulino Alcántara was part of the national squad.


=== ASEAN Championship ===
The Philippines participated in every edition of the AFF Championship except the 2008 edition, in which the team failed to qualify for the final tournament. Their first match in the tournament was a 0–5 defeat handed by Thailand in the 1996 edition. Freddy Gonzalez scored the first goal for the Philippines in the tournament in a 1–3 defeat, also to Thailand, in the 1998 edition. Chieffy Caligdong scored a brace in the national team's 2–1 victory against Timor Leste in the 2004 edition. The victory was the first for the Philippines in the AFF Championship.
The national team fared poorly during the first seven editions of the ASEAN Championships from 1996 to 2008, losing 19 out of 21 matches.  worst defeat at the tournament was the 1–13 match against Indonesia at the 2002 AFF Championship which was also remains the highest scoreline in the tournament as of 2020. The national team reached its first semi-finals at the 2010 AFF Championship after defeating Vietnam in a 2–0 upset victory dubbed the "Miracle of Hanoi".


=== Southeast Asian Games ===
The senior national team managed to reach the semi-finals of the football tournament of the Southeast Asian Games before the football was made into an under-23 tournament.


=== Minor tournaments ===
The Philippines participated at numerous minor friendly tournaments. Aside from other national teams, the Philippine nationals also faced selection teams and club sides from other nations at some of these tournaments. The team made a podium finish, placing not below third place, at the Japanese Empire-sanctioned East Asian Games in 1940, the Long Teng Cup (2010, 2011) held in Taiwan, and all three editions of the Philippine Peace Cup (2012, 2013 and 2014) hosted by the home country.


=== Regional record ===


== Honors ==


=== Continental ===
AFC Challenge Cup
 Runners-up (1): 2014
 Third place (1): 2012


=== Regional ===
Far Eastern Championship Games
 Gold medal (1): 1913
 Silver medal (6): 1915, 1917, 1919, 1921, 1923, 1925
 Bronze medal (3): 1927, 1930, 1934


=== Friendly ===
Philippine Peace Cup (2): 2012, 2013


=== Awards ===
ASEAN Championship Fair Play Award (1): 2010


=== Summary ===
Only official honours are included, according to FIFA statutes (competitions organized/recognized by FIFA or an affiliated confederation).


== See also ==
Football in the Philippines
Philippines national football team results
Philippines at the AFC Asian Cup


=== Men's ===
Philippines national under-23 football team
Philippines national under-21 football team
Philippines national under-19 football team
Philippines national under-17 football team


=== Women's ===
Philippines women's national football team
Philippines women's national under-20 football team
Philippines women's national under-17 football team


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Philippine Football Federation
Philippines at AFC
Philippines at FIFA
Philippines – World football elo ratings at ELOratings.net (Includes past fixtures & results)
 Media related to Philippines national football team at Wikimedia Commons
 Media related to Matches of the Philippines national football team at Wikimedia Commons
 Quotations related to Philippines men's national football team at Wikiquote