Smellmaxxing is a term describing a phenomenon where pre-adolescent and adolescent males use fragrances to enhance their body odor. This trend occurred in 2024 and was fueled by social media, specifically TikTok. Designer fragrances are often used to achieve this, frequently at a high cost.


== Background ==
As adolescent males progress through puberty, body odor is a frequent occurrence; a stereotype that has persisted in the United States is teenage males using Axe body spray as their primary fragrance. With the ubiquity of social media, the trend of smellmaxxing became prominent. As lower-end brands like Old Spice lost favor amongst Gen Z, more premium brands enjoyed a higher degree of popularity. Due to peer pressure in social arenas such as school, teenage boys conform to the trend.


== Description and aspects ==
TikTok influencers often recommend using different scents for different occasions. Other aspects include where on the body to apply the fragrances, where to store the fragrances, and how to make the smell last longer, for instance by first applying a moisturizer. The language used to describe the smells is not unlike that of sommeliers.


== Motivation ==
Motivations for smellmaxxing may include seduction, self-expression, achieving popularity, appearing more mature, or as a way to relate to older role models.


== Impact ==
A survey by Piper Sandler Companies, an investment bank, demonstrated that since the spring of 2023, the annual spending on fragrance amongst teenage males rose by 26%. Dior, Chanel, and Tom Ford were particularly popular brands. Teenage males often obtain these high-end items by saving their personal money and/or requesting them as gifts for birthdays or Christmas. Some classrooms have banned applying fragrances, and broken glass bottles of fragrance in backpacks became a regular occurrence. 
The trend has been pervasive in Western markets, but it also has gained traction in China. However, cultural factors such as price sensitivity, fragrance preferences, and consumption patterns affect the Chinese market differently. Nevertheless, the personal fragrance market demonstrated marked growth in China and is projected to grow.


== References ==