Telemundo Kids (borrowing its name from Telemundo's 1995–1998 Saturday morning block Telemundo Infantil) was an American children's programming block that debuted on October 6, 2001 on the Spanish-language television network Telemundo. The three-hour block, which aired on Saturday and Sunday mornings from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. Eastern Time and Pacific Time, featured live action and animated series aimed at children between the ages of 2 and 14.
Programs featured on the block consisted of a mixture of series originally produced in Spanish and dubbed versions of series that were originally produced and broadcast in English. All shows featured on Telemundo Kids were designed to meet federally mandated educational programming guidelines defined by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) through the Children's Television Act. Telemundo Kids closed on September 3, 2006. The following week, the block's successor Qubo en Telemundo debuted.


== History ==
 


=== Launch (2001–2003) ===
In October 2001, Telemundo announced that it would launch Telemundo Kids, which served as a revival to Telemundo Infantil (in English: Telemundo Kids) which aired from 1995 to 1998. The block also served as a replacement to Nickelodeon en Telemundo which was discontinued on September 30, 2001, after Telemundo's program supply deal with Nickelodeon had expired. Telemundo Kids featured some programs complaint with Federal Communications Commission and educational programming requirements. The three-hour block typically ran on Saturday and Sunday mornings from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. Eastern and Pacific Time. All other time periods were filled with infomercials (although some Telemundo affiliates chose to pre-empt the block of favor of the commercials and bumpers). The introduction a new logo with font text (Boink STD) with the orange line with the original 2000 "Telemundo" font, alongside bumpers and promos and controlled by Telemundo Network Group, LLC. (a unit of NBCUniversal).
The block included a three-hour lineup that consisted mainly of dubbed versions of American, Canadian, European animated series  the network opted to fully program was mix of acquired from various programming production companies and distributors, this included partnerships with Sony Pictures Television (via Adelaide Productions) and Sesame Workshop with Dragon Tales, the Japanese-based animation studio Toei Animation, the European-based animation studio BRB International and the Canadian-based animation studio Nelvana. The block was divided across Sábados de Fantasía ("Fantasy Saturdays") and Domingos de Aventura ("Adventure Sundays"). The block's initial lineup consisted mainly of shows originally produced and broadcast in English included Ni Ni's Treehouse, Men in Black: The Series, Dragon Tales, Jackie Chan Adventures and Max Steel, as well as the Japanese anime series such as Dragon Ball Z.


=== Rerurn of Nickelodeon programming (2004–2006) ===
On October 2, 2004, Nickelodeon-produced shows returned to Telemundo three years after Nickelodeon en Telemundo's closure. Programming featured on the block included Rugrats, Hey Arnold!, and Dora the Explorer (all of which aired on both Nickelodeon en Telemundo and Nick on CBS/Nick Jr. on CBS), along with All Grown Up!. Three Canadian shows also joined the lineup, they were Wimzie's House from CBC, Monster by Mistake and the Nelvana-produced show, Jacob Two-Two from YTV. While Nelvana began combining production shows of the agreement by acquiring programs for the Univision's sister channel, Telefutura cartoons for children's programming block, Toonturama line-up with the seven shows (such as Tales from the Cryptkeeper, Cadillacs and Dinosaurs, Stickin' Around, Anatole, Ned's Newt, Mythic Warriors and The Dumb Bunnies) as part of the growing cross-promotion aired from 2002 to 2005.


=== Discontinuation ===

Following the sale of Telemundo to NBC in 2001 and CBS and Viacom's split in early 2006, in May 2006, NBC, Telemundo and Ion Media Networks unveiled a joint venture with Corus Entertainment (and its subsidiary Nelvana), Scholastic, Classic Media (and its subsidiary Big Idea Productions) known as Qubo, which would aim to provide educational programming aimed at children between the ages of 4 and 8. This multi-platform programming endeavor would comprise children's programming blocks consisting of two English versions on NBC and Ion Media's i: Independent Television (now Ion Television) respectively, as well as a Spanish version on Telemundo. The endeavor would also include a separate 24-hour digital multicast channel on i’s owned-and-operated stations (alternatively known as Qubo Channel), a video on demand service, and a branded website.  
For Telemundo, the Qubo endeavor included a three-hour morning block divided into two 90-minute blocks airing on both Saturdays and Sundays. Telemundo Kids was officially discontinued on September 3, 2006. Only one program from the lineup, Jacob Two-Two, was moved to Qubo en Telemundo, which premiered the following week on September 9. All other programming, including the Nickelodeon shows, were removed completely from the lineup.  
Due to Discovery declining to renew its contract with NBC for its Saturday morning Discovery Kids on NBC block after March 2006, the discontinuation of Telemundo Kids occurred concurrently with the discontinuation of Discovery Kids on NBC, citing a desire to focus its children's programming efforts exclusively on the Discovery Kids cable channel.  

However, some Nickelodeon programs would move to other children's programming blocks. Notably, Dora the Explorer would be moved to competitor Univision as part of their Planeta U block on April 5, 2008, being joined by both its spin-off series Go, Diego, Go! as well as Noggin's Pinky Dinky Doo at launch. The Backyardigans would later join the lineup on June 25, 2011. On September 3, 2011, Pinky Dinky Doo was pulled from the lineup, being replaced by PBS Kids' Maya & Miguel the following week. Dora the Explorer and Go, Diego, Go! were pulled together from the lineup on May 24, 2014, and were replaced the following week by both Mickey Mouse Clubhouse and Handy Manny, following the launch of a sub-block called "Disney Junior en Univision". The Backyardigans was eventually pulled on July 25, 2015.


== Programming ==


=== Schedule issues ===
Due to regulations defined by the Children's Television Act that require stations to carry E/I compliant programming for three hours each week at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. local time, some Telemundo stations defered certain programs aired within its Saturday morning block to Sunday daytime or earlier Saturday morning slots, or (in the case of affiliates in the Western United States) Saturday afternoons as makegoods to comply with the CTA regulations.
Although the Telemundo Kids block regularly aired on Saturday and Sunday mornings, affiliates in some parts of the country deferred certain programs within the lineup to Sunday morning time slots to accommodate locally produced programs (such as weekend morning newscasts) or due to scheduling issues with regional or network sports broadcasts that start in time periods normally occupied by the block.

Telemundo Kids had concerns about commercial limits during its programming to its affiliates, including KTEL-TV in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
The six Telemundo Kids animated and live-action Spanish-dubbed shows including Jackie Chan Adventures, Dragon Tales, Juana la Iguana, Las Tres Mellizas, Nico and Dragon Ball Z were having a changed schedule for a weekend as the Sábados de Fantasía (Fantasy Saturdays) block aired on every Saturday, but the six shows were still included with Domingos de Aventura (Adventure Sundays) in scheduled and changing the time at 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. ET/PT on Telemundo since October 25, 2003 with the paid programming continued with Telemundo Kids in the next schedule time clock area on weekends.
However, other shows (including Men in Black: The Series, Max Steel, Ni Ni's Treehouse, Auga Viva, Bizbirije and Toonimals!) were removed or changed in the schedule on October 19, 2003, while the schedule was changed again when Nickelodeon programming return to air four shows and some Canadian shows with Spanish-dubbed in Telemundo Kids premiered on October 2, 2004.
Not only were changing schedules and commercial limits had concerns on the children programming block, they were also delays on programming premieres. Men in Black: The Series was originally scheduled to premiere on the block on November 11, 2001. However, it was delayed for one week due to scheduling issues with Dragon Tales on Telemundo at 7:30 a.m. Men in Black: The Series was rescheduled to November 18, 2001.


=== Former Telemundo Kids shows programming ===


== See also ==
Qubo - Successor block to Telemundo Kids, which then became exclusive to both a programming block on Ion Television and a standalone 24-hour digital multicast network until its closure in 2021.
Children's programming on Telemundo
NBC Kids/MiTelemundo -  Telemundo also aired a version of the block under "MiTelemundo" brand, which was aired same as the main program, featuring a separate lineup of Spanish-dubbed programs from July 7, 2012, until December 31, 2017.
Discovery Kids on NBC -  The block was produced under a time-lease agreement with Discovery Kids.
Nickelodeon en Telemundo - Telemundo entered into a programming agreement with Nickelodeon to carry the cable channel's programming as part of a morning children's program block.
TNBC - TNBC was an American teen-oriented programming block that aired on NBC from September 12, 1992, to September 28, 2002.


== References ==


== External links ==