The 1904 Summer Olympics were held in St. Louis, Missouri, United States from July 1 to November 23, 1904, as part of the St. Louis World's Fair. 
A total of 651 athletes from 12 nations participated in 95 events in 16 sports at these games.
Nine participating nations earned medals, in addition to four medals won by mixed teams. In the early Olympic Games, several team events were contested by athletes from multiple nations. Retroactively, the IOC created the designation "mixed team" (with the country code ZZX) to refer to these groups of athletes. Some athletes won medals both individually and as part of a mixed team, so these medals are tabulated under different nations in the official counts.
The United States won 231 medals, setting a record that still stands today. The Soviet Union came closest to beating the record with 195 medals at the 1980 Summer Olympics and currently is in second place. The Soviets, however, won a record 80 gold medals, surpassing 76 golds won by the Americans in 1904. However, the United States subsequently won 83 gold medals in the 1984 Summer Olympics, setting another all-time record. Gold medals were awarded to event winners for the first time at the 1904 games. Prior to that, a silver medal was awarded to first-place finishers and a bronze medal to second-place finishers.


== Medal table ==

The medal table is based on information provided by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and is consistent with IOC conventional sorting in its published medal tables. The table uses the Olympic medal table sorting method. By default, the table is ordered by the number of gold medals the athletes from a nation have won, where a nation is an entity represented by a NOC. The number of silver medals is taken into consideration next and then the number of bronze medals. If teams are still tied, equal ranking is given and they are listed alphabetically by their IOC country code.

  *   Host nation (United States)


== Changes in medal standings ==

Key
  ※   Disqualified athlete(s)


== References ==


== External links ==
"St Louis 1904". Olympics.com. International Olympic Committee.
"1904 Summer Olympics". Olympedia.com. Retrieved February 24, 2021.
"Olympic Analytics/1904_1". olympanalyt.com.