The 1912 Summer Olympics, officially known as the Games of the V Olympiad, were an international multi-sport event held in Stockholm, Sweden, between 5 May and 27 July 1912. A total of 2,407 athletes representing 28 National Olympic Committees (NOCs) participated, which included seven teams making their Olympic debut at the Summer Games; Chile, Egypt, Iceland, Japan, Luxembourg, Portugal, and Serbia. The games featured 107 events in 19 disciplines. The games included the Olympic debut of equestrian dressage and eventing, as well as the modern pentathlon.
Athletes representing 19 NOCs received at least one medal, with 16 winning at least one gold medal. Sweden won the most medals overall, with 65, while the United States won the most gold medals, with 44. Among individual participants, Swedish shooter Vilhelm Carlberg, Finnish runner Hannes Kolehmainen, and American shooter Alfred Lane tied for the most gold medals, with three each. Carlberg had the most total medals, with five (three gold, two silver).


== Medal table ==

The medal table is based on information provided by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and is consistent with IOC conventional sorting in its published medal tables. The table uses the Olympic medal table sorting method. By default, the table is ordered by the number of gold medals the athletes from a nation have won, where a nation is an entity represented by a NOC. The number of silver medals is taken into consideration next and then the number of bronze medals. If teams are still tied, equal ranking is given and they are listed alphabetically by their IOC country code.
The 1912 Games featured five art competitions which awarded medals, but did not do so for a full top three, instead opting to award only a first or first and second place medal. Only gold and no silver or bronze medals were awarded in architecture, literature, music, and painting. In sculpturing, a gold and silver medal, but no bronze, were awarded.
In the men's light heavyweight Greco-Roman, the final round featured three wrestlers, Anders Ahlgren, Ivar Böhling, and Béla Varga, who took turns facing off against one another. Ahlgren and Böhling defeated Varga, but they were unable to defeat each other. The match between Ahlgren and Böhling lasted for over 9 hours without a victor. The Olympic rules at the time specifically stated that the winner must have beaten their opponent, and since neither person could claim to have done so, both Ahlgreen and Böhling were awarded silver medals, with no gold being awarded.
In men's single sculls and men's coxed four, there were two-way ties for third which resulted in two bronze medals being awarded in each event. In men's pole vault, there was a two-way tie for second, which resulted in two silver medals being awarded. Additionally, there was a three-way tie for fourth, which the IOC awarded bronze medals for. 
In the tug of war, three of the five teams withdrew for unknown reasons, resulting in only two teams participating and a bronze medal not being awarded. Three teams made the final round of the men's 4 x 100 metres relay, but when Germany was disqualified for a faulty baton pass, it resulted in no bronze medal being awarded for the event.

  *   Host nation (Sweden)


== Changes in medal standings ==


== See also ==

All-time Olympic Games medal table
List of 1912 Summer Olympics medal winners


== References ==