The 1932 Summer Olympics, officially known as the Games of the X Olympiad, were an international multi-sport event held in Los Angeles, California, United States, from July 30 to August 14. A total of 1,334 athletes representing 37 National Olympic Committees (NOCs) participated, including Colombia and the Republic of China, who took part for the first time. The games featured 117 events in 14 sports across 20 disciplines. The games also featured 9 medal events in various art competitions Germany was also awarded a gold medal in alpinism for a climb that took place before the games, which is counted in the official medal count.
Athletes representing 28 NOCs received at least one medal, with 19 NOCs winning at least one gold medal. The United States won the most overall medals, with 110, and the most gold medals, with 44. Latvia and Mexico won their first Summer Olympic medals of any kind. Among individual participants, Italian fencer Giulio Gaudini (three silver, one bronze), Hungarian gymnast István Pelle (two gold, two silver), and Finnish gymnast Heikki Savolainen (one silver, three bronze) had the most total medals with four each. Italian gymnast Romeo Neri and American swimmer Helene Madison tied for the most gold medals, with three each.


== Medal table ==

The medal table is based on information provided by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and is consistent with IOC conventional sorting in its published medal tables. The table uses the Olympic medal table sorting method. By default, the table is ordered by the number of gold medals the athletes from a nation have won, where a nation is an entity represented by a NOC. The number of silver medals is taken into consideration next and then the number of bronze medals. If teams are still tied, equal ranking is given and they are listed alphabetically by their IOC country code.
The literature and paintings portion of the arts competitions did not award a bronze medal, while the music event did not award bronze or gold, awarding only a silver medal.
In 8 Metre sailing, there were only two teams competing, which resulted in a bronze medal not being awarded in the event. In equestrian team jumping, no medals were awarded due to all involved teams failing to finish with enough riders to qualify for a medal. In equestrian team eventing, only two teams finished, resulting in a bronze medal going unclaimed. In alpinism, only a gold medal and no silver or bronze medal were awarded.

  *   Host nation (United States)


== See also ==

All-time Olympic Games medal table
List of 1932 Summer Olympics medal winners
1932 Winter Olympics medal table


== References ==