The 2021 Summer Deaflympics, officially known as the 24th Summer Deaflympics or XXIV Summer Deaflympics, and commonly known as Caxias Do Sul 2021, was an international multi-sport event held from 1 to 15 May 2022 in Brazil. The main host city was Caxias do Sul, Brazil, originally scheduled for December 2021 but postponed until May 2022 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition to Caxias, there were events scheduled for the neighboring cities of Farroupilha and Flores da Cunha. In April 2022, CISS has announced that due to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Russian and Belarusian athletes were barred from competing in Caxias do Sul, and in the same press release it was also announced that the bowling tournament was scheduled to be held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, during October 2022.
This is also the first time since the 2007 Winter Deaflympics, held in Salt Lake City, for the event to be held in the CISS Americas Region, and the third time for the Games to be held in the Southern Hemisphere as the 1989 games were held in Christchurch in New Zealand and 2005 games Melbourne in Australia.


== Host city selection ==
Due to the lack of interested parties, the process of choosing the venue for the Deaflympics was postponed several times, until the Brazilian Confederation of Sports for the Deaf presented an emergency proposal to host the next edition of the Summer Games. Accepted as host country for the 2021 Games at a meeting of the International Committee of Sports for the Deaf on 26 February 2020 Caxias do Sul in Rio Grande do Sul,was proposed as host city and the games were scheduled to take place from 5 to 21 December 2021 during the late spring and early summer at the host city. As a consequence of the postponement of the 2020 Summer Olympics to 2021, it was announced in January 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic the 2021 Summer Deaflympics was rescheduled to May 2022.

Caxias do Sul,  Brazil - Only bidder


== Sports ==
Originally, the program for this edition would consist of 221 finals in 18 sports. However, due to problems with the available infrastructure and the low number of participants, the bowling events had to be removed from Caxias do Sul and was later relocated to Kuala Lumpur in Malaysia and were held between on 20–30 October 2022. Thus, the program will consist of 216 events in 18 sports. Medals disputed in Malaysia were later added to the medal table and their results and the number of athletes also added to official statistics. New events were added in athletics, karate, orienteering, shooting, and swimming, whereas the number of events in bowling, judo, and taekwondo has been reduced. This was also be the first time since the 2001 Summer Deaflympics that a women's handball tournament was held.


=== Bowling ===
Bowling was held between on 21–30 October 2022 in Kuala Lumpur.

 Bowling  ()  (12)


== Calendar ==

In the following calendar for the events held in Caxias do Sul, each blue box represents an event competition. The yellow boxes represent days during which medal-awarding finals for a sport are held. The number in each yellow box represents the number of finals that are contested on that day. This schedule doesn't include the bowling events.


== Participating nations ==
Athletes from Russia and Belarus were barred from competing at the event after a ban as a result of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Australia,China and Great Britain withdrew from the competition because of the worsening conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic at their countries.
72 National Deaf Sports Federations (with bowling 73 nations) sent their delegations to Caxias do Sul and Kuala Lumpur:


== Medal table ==
Source:

  *   Host nation (Brazil)


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
CISS Official Results