The 2022 Winter Olympics, officially known as the XXIV Olympic Winter Games, were a winter multi-sport event held in Beijing, China, from 4 to 20 February. A total of 2,871 athletes from 91 nations participated in 109 events in seven sports across 15 disciplines.
Overall 29 nations received at least one medal, and 23 of them won at least one gold medal. Athletes from Norway won the most medals overall, with 37, and the most gold medals, with 16. The latter record was the highest gold medal tally at a single Winter Games. Host nation China won nine gold medals surpassing its gold medal tally of five during the 2010 winter edition. Athletes from that nation also won 15 medals overall, which eclipsed its record of 11 at both the 2006 and 2010 winter editions.
Biathletes Johannes Thingnes Bø, Quentin Fillon Maillet, and Marte Olsbu Røiseland, and cross-country skier Alexander Bolshunov won the most total medals at the games with five each. Bø also earned the most gold medals with four. Snowboarder Zoi Sadowski-Synnott of New Zealand won the first Winter Olympic gold medal for that nation. Germany achieved a podium sweep in the men's two-man bobsleigh competition with Francesco Friedrich and Thorsten Margis	winning gold, Johannes Lochner and Florian Bauer earning silver, and Christoph Hafer and Matthias Sommer attaining bronze.


== Medal table ==

The medal table is based on information provided by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and is consistent with IOC conventional sorting in its published medal tables. The table uses the Olympic medal table sorting method. By default, the table is ordered by the number of gold medals the athletes from a nation have won, where a nation is an entity represented by a NOC. The number of silver medals is taken into consideration next and then the number of bronze medals. If teams are still tied, equal ranking is given and they are listed alphabetically by their IOC country code.
Two bronze medals were awarded to Daniela Maier and Fanny Smith for a third-place tie in the freestyle women's ski cross event following a decision by the Court of Arbitration for Sport.

Key
  ‡   Changes in medal standings (see below)

  *   Host nation (China)


== Changes in medal standings ==


== See also ==
2022 Winter Paralympics medal table
List of 2022 Winter Olympics medal winners


== References ==