The 2030 Commonwealth Games, officially known as the XXIV Commonwealth Games, and branded as Amdavad 2030, is a planned multi-sport event scheduled to take place in Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India, in October 2030. This will be the second Commonwealth Games to be hosted in India, following the 2010 Games in Delhi, and the third in Asia; it will also be the centenary edition of the event. 


== Host selection ==

Potential host cities began exploring bids as early as 2021. A deadline of 31 March 2025 was set for potential host cities to express interest in hosting, and a deadline of 31 August 2025 was set for bid dossiers. India and Nigeria submitted formal proposals to host the 2030 Commonwealth Games by the 31 August deadline, Commonwealth Sport announced on 1 September. On 15 October 2025, Commonwealth Sport announced that the Indian bid had been recommended by its bid evaluation commission. The 2030 Commonwealth Games host city election was held during the Commonwealth Sport General Assembly in Glasgow on 26 November 2025. During the assembly, Commonwealth Sport officially declared Ahmedabad as the official host of the centennial edition of the Commonwealth Games.


=== Recommended bid ===


=== Eliminated bid ===


=== Proposed bids ===
 South Africa
A potential bid from South Africa was speculated ahead of the 2024 Commonwealth heads of government meeting in Samoa. Durban had previously been awarded hosting of the 2022 Commonwealth Games but was later stripped of hosting rights due to organizational and budget constraints, and Durban was replaced by Birmingham in 2017.
In June 2025, South Africa had been invited to bid for the 2030 edition, but its 2036 Olympic hopes were uncertain as the South African Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee awaited cabinet approval by the government. The ambition is part of a long-term vision, which includes hosting smaller international events as preparation. SASCOC intends to first target the Commonwealth Games, including both youth and senior editions, in 2030, before mounting a serious campaign for the Olympics in 2040.
 Canada
United Canada
In March 2025, Commonwealth Sport Canada proposed a "United Canada" bid to host the Games, with venues spread across Canada's provinces. The president of the association, Rick Powers, states that there would be no new construction, but existing venues may need renovations. He went on to say that this plan would lower costs by 60% compared to a single city hosting, and that the budget would be shared across the host provinces. One of the directors, Claire Carver-Dias, had suggested the inclusion of lacrosse if the event was to be held in a First Nations territory.
On 31 March 2025, Commonwealth Sport Canada submitted an expression of interest, and would also reveal that the government, Indigenous peoples, and the provinces of Manitoba, Newfoundland and Labrador, Ontario, and Prince Edward Island had indicated their support. However, in June 2025, the government of Ontario withdrew the province from the bid.
Alberta
A potential bid from the province of Alberta, predominantly featuring Calgary, Edmonton and possibly other cities, was examined for the 2030 Commonwealth Games. The bid exploration received a potential for C$4 million in financial backing from the two cities and the province. On 3 August 2023, the Government of Alberta withdrew from Alberta's 2030 Commonwealth Games bid process thereby terminating the bid.
Hamilton, Ontario
A group of Hamilton businessmen planned a bid for the 2030 edition of the Commonwealth Games to mark 100 years since the city hosted the original Games, briefly considered the 2026 edition when it became apparent there would be little other competition to host. But in April 2021, the spokesperson and chair for the Hamilton bid, Lou Frapporti, announced that Hamilton would scrap any bid for the 2026 edition and resume focusing on the 2030 edition instead. Frapporti stated that the reason for resuming focus on 2030 was that the province of Ontario was unlikely to support the 2026 bid due to the 2026 FIFA World Cup being scheduled to have games in Toronto and the unlikelihood of the CGF alternatively allowing for a move to 2027. In February 2023, it was announced that Hamilton was no longer Canada's preferred candidate for the 2030 Commonwealth Games, according to Commonwealth Sport Canada.


=== Declined bids ===
 Australia
Australian Commonwealth Games Association chief executive Craig Phillips stated his country's decision to decline to host the games due to close proximity to the 2032 Summer Olympics in Brisbane, and Victoria's decision to withdraw from hosting the 2026 Commonwealth Games.
Perth
On 17 April 2025, a newspaper in Western Australia reported that leader of the Western Australian Liberal Party, Basil Zempilas wanted Perth to bid, but missed the deadline to submit an expression of interest. Politician John Carey dismissed this proposal, calling it a "brain fart that would cost the state billions".


== Development and preparations ==

The Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Sports Enclave is expected to be heavily used during the event.


=== Venues ===


== Participating associations ==
All 74 Commonwealth Games Associations are expected to participate in the 2030 Commonwealth Games. 


== Sports ==

In October 2021, the CGF announced a new Games roadmap that will, starting with the 2030 Commonwealth Games, change the requirements for competed sports. The roadmap suggests that between 15 and 17 sports should be competed at each edition. There will be a new category of "Compulsory Sports", containing just athletics and swimming, as well as their para-sport counterparts. The category of "Core Sports" will cease to exist, and all other sports will have the same status; however, each host will have complete freedom to choose the program for their edition from a previously assembled list, as long as the maximum number of 17 sports is not exceeded. If necessary, the hosts could suggest the addition of other sports that respect local demands.
Following the formal announcement of the host city on 26 November 2025, the first eight sports for 2030 were confirmed for the event, namely athletics, swimming, table tennis, bowls, weightlifting (plus their Para-sport equivalents) together with artistic gymnastics, netball and boxing. A further seven to nine sports from the following list of fifteen optional sports will also be chosen at a later date; archery, badminton, 3x3 basketball, beach volleyball, T20 cricket, cycling, diving, hockey,  judo, rhythmic gymnastics, rugby sevens, shooting, squash, triathlon and wrestling - along with up to two host-chosen new or traditional sports, including kabaddi.


== Broadcasting ==
Australia – Seven Network


== See also ==
Other multi-sports events hosted in India:
1951 and 1982 Asian Games in Delhi
2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi
2008 Commonwealth Youth Games in Pune


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==