The Association of Summer Olympic International Federations (ASOIF) is a non-profit association of international sports federations that compete in the Summer Olympic Games. It is headquartered in Lausanne, Switzerland, the same city where the International Olympic Committee (IOC) is also headquartered.


== ASOIF Council ==
The council is composed of a president and six members, all from different federations. One of the six members is elected as vice-president. The president and all the members are elected for 4-year mandates. The executive director is nominated by the council on the proposal of the president as an executive position. The executive director is also on the council, but without voting rights.
Members of the ASOIF Council as of March 2025 are:


== Members ==
International federations may apply to become a full member if they govern a core Summer Olympic sport or govern a sport which featured in the three most recent Summer Olympics. They may apply to become an associate member if they govern a sport included on the programme for future editions of the Summer Olympic Games or govern a sport which has featured in any five editions of the Summer Olympic Games since 1988.
As of June 2025, the Association of Summer Olympic International Federations (ASOIF) has 30 full member and six associate member international federations.


=== Full members ===


=== Associate members ===


== History ==
On 30 May 1983, the 21 International Federations governing the sports included at the time on the programme of the 1984 Summer Olympic Games decided to form the Association of Summer Olympic International Federations (ASOIF).
ASOIF was formed, as stated in the first article of its constitution 'to co-ordinate and to defend the common interests of its members' and to 'ensure close co-operation between its members, and members of the Olympic Movement and other organisations'. These needs were identified in order to preserve the unity of the Olympic movement while maintaining 'the authority, independence and autonomy of the member International Federations.'
The members of ASOIF meet once a year in a General Assembly. The General Assembly usually precedes the joint meeting between the executive board of the International Olympic Committee and the International Federations where a multitude of topics are discussed in the common interests of the Olympic Movement. ASOIF is administered by an executive body, the council, which consists of seven individual members, most of whom are presidents of Summer Olympic International Federations. The ASOIF General Secretariat is located in Lausanne and is administered by the ASOIF Executive Director.
In 2015, the Organising Committee for the Olympic Games Tokyo 2020 had proposed five new sports in response to the new flexibility provided by Olympic Agenda 2020, the IOC's strategic roadmap for the future of the Olympic Movement. Olympic Agenda 2020 gives host cities the option of suggesting new sports and events for inclusion in their edition of the Games. Karate, skateboarding, sports climbing, surfing and baseball/softball were added to the Olympic Programme in Tokyo 2020. ASOIF has amended its statutes to enable IFs "governing sports included within the events programme for a specific edition of the Summer Olympic Games" to become "Associate Members".
On 22 June 2023, the IOC decided to withdraw recognition of the International Boxing Association (IBA), in accordance with Rule 3.7 of the Olympic Charter (OC), although boxing will continue to be an Olympic sport for the 2028 Summer Olympics. This was the first-ever international federation to be removed from the Olympic Movement by the IOC. According to the Statutes of ASOIF, as updated in June 2023, the ASOIF Council may provisionally suspend any Full Member's rights (set forth in Article 3.4) if its IOC recognition is suspended, but allow it to retain its Member's rights set forth in Article 3.5. The Council may lift the suspension when such full member's IOC recognition is reinstated (Article 3.13). In April 2024 the ASOIF General Assembly excluded the International Boxing Association (IBA) as ASOIF Member, in line with the ASOIF Statutes. This move follows the CAS decision of 2 April 2024, dismissing IBA's appeal against the IOC decision to withdraw IBA's recognition as the international federation (IF) for Olympic boxing. Previously, ASOIF had already suspended IBA's Full Member's rights.


== See also ==
International Olympic Committee (IOC)
Association of International Olympic Winter Sports Federations (AIOWF)
Association of the IOC Recognised International Sports Federations (ARISF)
SportAccord


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
ASOIF at IOC website