Below is a list of athletes who competed in both the Summer and Winter Olympics, as of the end of the 2024 Summer Olympics.
Prior to the 1924 Winter Olympics, the winter sports of Figure skating and Ice hockey had been contested in the Summer Olympics. The creation of the first winter games allowed for many athletes of the era to compete in both sets of games in the same discipline, and on this page these athletes are listed below the main list. The Russian athlete Nikolai Panin is unique in having competed in both a summer sport (shooting in 1912) and a winter sport (figure skating in 1908) but only competing at the Summer Olympics.
Among these athletes, the most-occurring combination is bobsledding and athletics (also known as track and field), followed by cycling and speed skating. Other events competed in by Summer and Winter Olympians include fencing, sailing, ski jumping, and equestrian events. Only seven of the 139 athletes won medals in both the Summer or Winter Olympics. 
Eddie Eagan and Gillis Grafström were the only two athletes to win gold medals in both the Summer and Winter Olympics.  Grafström has the further distinction of being the only person to have won an individual gold medal in both the Summer (1920) and Winter Olympics (1924, 1928), meanwhile Eagan remains the only athlete to have managed the feat in different disciplines. Some of the Olympians competed in both sets of games over a span of different decades.


== Athletes who competed in both the Summer and Winter Olympics in different sports ==


== Athletes who competed in both the Summer and Winter Olympics in the same sport ==


== Uncertain athletes ==
The next 23 athletes have an uncertain status: they haven't participated at one (or more) of 2 or more sports but their appearance in the Olympic official website is considered official. Some of them have been already included in the list above. There are also some contrasts between Olympedia and the Olympics official website regarding the number of appearances.
Sports and years in bold are those sports and years that are considered as official in the Olympics website or Olympedia but the athletes haven't participated in those years at those sports (or 1 out of more times).


== Notes ==


== References ==