Indian Americans are citizens or residents of the United States of America who trace their family descent to India. Notable Indian Americans include:


== Academics ==


=== Nobel Prize recipients ===

Har Gobind Khorana (1922–2011), Nobel Prize in Medicine, 1968
Subramanyan Chandrasekhar (1910–1995), Nobel Prize for Physics, 1983
Venkatraman Ramakrishnan (b. 1952), Nobel Prize in Chemistry, 2009; Former President of the Royal Society, (2015–2020)
Abhijit Banerjee (b. 1961), Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, 2019; Ford Foundation International Professor of Economics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology


=== Deans and presidents ===
Rakesh Khurana (born 1967), dean of Harvard College
Neeli Bendapudi (born 1962), president of University of Louisville
Jamshed Bharucha (born 1956), former president of Cooper Union, (2011–2015); former dean of arts & sciences at Dartmouth College and former provost at Tufts University
Vijay K. Dhir (born 1943), former dean of the University of California, Los Angeles Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science, (2003–2016)
Ravi V. Bellamkonda (born 1968), Vinik Dean of Engineering at Duke University Edmund T. Pratt Jr. School of Engineering
Dinesh D'Souza (born 1961), former president of The King's College, New York, (2010–2012)
Anjli Jain (born 1981), executive director of Campus Consortium
Dipak C. Jain (born 1957), former dean of INSEAD, (2011–2013); former dean of the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University, (2001–2009)
Vistasp Karbhari, former president of the University of Texas at Arlington, (2013–2020)
Pramod Khargonekar (born 1956), control theorist; vice chancellor of research at University of California, Irvine; former dean, College of Engineering at University of Florida, Gainesville, (2001–2009)
Renu Khator (born 1958), chancellor of the University of Houston System and president of the University of Houston; former provost and senior vice president, University of South Florida
Pradeep Khosla (born 1957), chancellor of the University of California, San Diego
Sunil Kumar (academic administrator), president of Tufts University,
Sathees B Chandra, Dean for College of Health Sciences (CoHS), Samuel Merritt University, California
Vijay Kumar (born 1962), dean of the School of Engineering and Applied Science at the University of Pennsylvania
Saira Rao, former Colorado congressional candidate and activist 
Geeta Menon, dean emeritus of the undergraduate college at New York University Stern School of Business
Nitin Nohria (born 1962), former dean of Harvard Business School, (2010–2020)
Sethuraman Panchanathan, director of National Science Foundation and former executive vice president and chief research and innovation officer at Arizona State University
Michael Rao, president of Virginia Commonwealth University
S. Narasinga Rao, former dean of Jackson College of Graduate Studies and Research at the University of Central Oklahoma
Beheruz Sethna, president of the University of West Georgia
Paul Shrivastava, chief sustainability officer and director, Sustainability Institute, Pennsylvania State University
Molly Easo Smith, president of Manhattanville College
Kumble R. Subbaswamy, chancellor of the University of Massachusetts Amherst
Subra Suresh, president of Carnegie Mellon University
Satish K. Tripathi, president of University at Buffalo
Sundaraja Sitharama Iyengar, Ryder Professor of Computer Science and director of the School of Computing and Information Sciences at Florida International University, Miami
S. Shankar Sastry, former dean of the UC Berkeley College of Engineering
Bala V. Balachandran (born 1937), professor emeritus at Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University; founder, dean and chairman of Great Lakes Institute of Management and executive professor & strategy adviser to the dean of the Bauer College of Business at University of Houston
Nagi Naganathan, president of Oregon Institute of Technology and former president and dean of the College of Engineering at the University of Toledo, (2001–2016)
Sri Zaheer, dean of Carlson School of Management at the University of Minnesota
Vallabh Sambamurthy, Dean of the Wisconsin School of Business at the University of Wisconsin–Madison
Naureen Hassan, American finance executive who serves as the president of UBS Americas; previously served as the first vice president and chief operating officer of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York


=== Mathematicians ===
Raj Chandra Bose (1901–1987), mathematician
Shamit Kachru (b. 1970), Mathematical Physicist, professor at Stanford Institute for Theoretical Physics
Akshay Venkatesh (b. 1981), Fields Medal laureate, mathematician
Shreeram Shankar Abhyankar (1930–2012), mathematician, singularity theory and Abhyankar's conjecture of finite group theory
Raghu Raj Bahadur (1924–1997), statistician
Manjul Bhargava (b. 1974), professor of mathematics at Princeton University and winner of Fields Medal, 2014
Rahul Pandharipande (b. 1969), joined as Professor of Mathematics at Princeton University in 2002, he accepted a Professorship at ETH Zürich
Sarvadaman Chowla (1907–1995), mathematician specializing in number theory
Harish-Chandra (1923–1983), mathematician, IBM Von Neumann Professor at Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton
Narendra Karmarkar (b. 1955), mathematician, inventor of Karmarkar algorithm
Chandrashekhar Khare (b. 1968), professor of mathematics at the University of California, Los Angeles
G. S. Maddala (1933–1999), mathematician and economist best known for work in the field of econometrics
Anil Nerode (b. 1932), mathematician, proved the Myhill-Nerode Theorem
Ria Persad (b. 1974), mathematician, classical musician, and model
K. C. Sreedharan Pillai (1920–1985), mathematician
Calyampudi Radhakrishna Rao (1920–2023), professor at Penn State University and research professor at the University at Buffalo
Radha Laha (1930–1999), probabilist, statistician, and mathematician
S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan (b. 1940), New York University mathematician who specialised in probability; winner of the Abel Prize and Steele Prize
DJ Patil (b. 1974), mathematician & Data scientist
Sucharit Sarkar (b. 1983), mathematician and topologist
Sourav Chatterjee (b. 1979), statistician, mathematician and professor at Stanford
Kannan Soundararajan (b. 1973), mathematician, professor at Stanford and IMO medalist.
Subhash Khot (b. 1978), mathematician, theoretical computer scientist famous for Unique games conjecture.
Sanjeev Arora (b. 1968), mathematician, theoretical computer scientist and Gödel Prize winner.
Kiran Kedlaya (b. 1974), mathematician
Davender Singh Malik (1958–2025), mathematician
N. U. Prabhu, mathematician


=== Economists ===

Abhijit Banerjee (b. 1961), Ford Foundation international professor of economics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Nobel Laureate in Economic Sciences 2019.
Pranab Bardhan (b. 1939), professor emeritus of Economics University of California, Berkeley
Kaushik Basu (b. 1952), C. Marks Professor of International Studies and Professor of Economics Cornell University
Jagdish Natwarlal Bhagwati (b. 1934), professor of economics at Columbia University
Alok Bhargava (b. 1954), professor of economics at the University of Maryland School of Public Policy
V. V. Chari (b. 1952), professor of economics at the University of Minnesota
Raj Chetty (b. 1979), professor of economics at Harvard University
Srikant Datar, The 11th Dean of Harvard Business School, took charge from January 1, 2021
Avinash Kamalakar Dixit (b. 1944), professor of economics at Princeton University
Gita Gopinath (b. 1971), chief economist at the International Monetary Fund and Economic Adviser to the Chief Minister of Kerala
Reema Harrysingh-Carmona (b. 1970), economist and the 5th First Lady of Trinidad and Tobago
Sendhil Mullainathan (b. 1973), professor of economics, Harvard University
Arvind Panagariya (b. 1952), professor of economics at Columbia University
Debraj Ray (b. 1957), Silver Professor of Economics, New York University
Ruchir Sharma, chief global strategist of asset management and emerging markets equity, Morgan Stanley Investment Management
Arvind Subramanian (b. 1959), Chief Economic Advisor Government of India and formerly an economist at the International Monetary Fund


=== Professors and scholars in computer science or engineering and electrical engineering ===
Amit Sahai (b.1974), professor of computer science at University of California, Los Angeles, fellow of Association for Computing Machinery,
Amit Sheth, computer scientist at Wright State University in Dayton, Ohio
Anant Agarwal, professor of electrical engineering and director of the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory at Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Aravind Joshi (1929–2017), professor of computer and cognitive science at the University of Pennsylvania
Arvind, Johnson Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Arogyaswami Paulraj (b. 1944), professor of electrical engineering at Stanford University
Ashwin Ram (b. 1960), head of artificial intelligence Amazon Alexa
Avinash Kak (b. 1944), professor of electrical and computer engineering at Purdue University
B. Jayant Baliga (b. 1948), inventor of the Insulated-gate bipolar transistor
Bhubaneswar Mishra (b. 1961), professor of computer science, engineering & mathematics at Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences of New York University and visiting scholar at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.
Chandra Kintala (1948–2009), former Vice President Bell Labs
Gopal H. Gaonkar (b. 1936), a professor of engineering at Florida Atlantic University
Hari Balakrishnan, Fujitsu Chair Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at Massachusetts Institute of Technology
K. Mani Chandy, professor of computer science at the California Institute of Technology
Krishna Saraswat, professor of electrical engineering at Stanford University
Madhu Sudan, professor of computer science at Harvard University
Prabhat Mishra, professor of computer science and engineering at University of Florida
Raj Jain, professor of computer science and engineering at Washington University School of Engineering and Applied Science
Rangasami L. Kashyap (b. 1938), professor of electrical engineering at Purdue University
Ricky J. Sethi, professor of computer science at Fitchburg State University; director of Research at The Madsci Network
Saraju Mohanty, professor of computer science and engineering at the University of North Texas
Shree K. Nayar, professor of computer science at Columbia University
Shrikanth Narayanan, award-winning researcher, inventor and educator at University of Southern California
Shwetak Patel, professor of computer science and electrical engineering at the University of Washington
Supriyo Datta, Thomas Duncan Distinguished Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the Purdue University
Thomas Kailath, professor of engineering at Stanford University
Vijay Vazirani (b. 1957), professor of computer science at University of California, Irvine
Unnikrishna Pillai, Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at New York University
Suman Datta (b. 1973), professor of electrical engineering at the University of Notre Dame, Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and the Stinson Professor of Nanotechnology at the University of Notre Dame


=== Professors and scholars in other disciplines ===
Avantika Bawa, Professor of Fine Art, Washington State University, Vancouver, Washington.
Arun Rai, Regents' Professor of the University System of Georgia and Howard S. Starks Distinguished Chair, Georgia State University
Amishi Jha, American neuroscientist and professor of psychology
Kuzhikalail M. Abraham, professor at Northeastern University, electrochemistry; materials science; lithium, lithium ion, and lithium air batteries
Mrinal K. Sen, John A. and Katherine G. Jackson Chair in Applied Seismology at Jackson School of Geosciences, University of Texas at Austin.
Nita Ahuja, Chief of Surgical Oncology at Johns Hopkins Hospital, surgeon-scientist, first women ever to lead this department at Johns Hopkins Hospital.
Pulickel M. Ajayan, professor of material science at Rice University
Salman Akhtar, professor at the Jefferson Medical College
Muzaffar Alam, professor in South Asian Languages & Civilizations at the University of Chicago
Akhil Amar, professor of law at Yale Law School
Vikram Amar, professor of law at the University of California, Davis School of Law
Abhay Ashtekar, professor of physics and Director of the Institute for Gravitational Physics and Geometry at Pennsylvania State University
Satya N. Atluri, Presidential Chair and University Distinguished Professor Texas Tech University, Recipient, Padma Bhushan in Science and Engineering in 2013 from the President of India
Geeta Menon, Abraham Krasnoff Professor of Global Business and current chair of the Marketing Department at New York University Stern School of Business
P.S. Ayyaswamy, professor of dynamical engineering at the University of Pennsylvania
Homi K. Bhabha, Anne F. Rothenberg Professor of English and American Literature and Language, and the Director of the Mahindra Humanities Center at Harvard University
Margaret Abraham, professor of sociology at Hofstra University; served as the 18th president (2014–2018) of the International Sociological Association
Mahzarin Banaji, professor at Harvard University, best known for exploring implicit racial and gender biases
Nalini Ambady, professor of psychology and social psychologist
Sugata Bose, professor of history at Harvard University
Ananda Mohan Chakrabarty, professor of microbiology at University of Illinois at Chicago
Arup Chakraborty, Robert T. Haslam Professor focusing in biophysics, computational modeling and infectious disease at Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Naresh Dalal, Dirac Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Florida State University
Aswath Damodaran, professor of finance at the Stern School of Business at New York University
Ashok Das, professor of physics at the University of Rochester
Ashok Gadgil, professor of civil and environmental engineering at the University of California, Berkeley
Rajit Gadh, professor of mechanical and aerospace engineering at University of California, Los Angeles
Akhilesh K. Gaharwar, professor in the Department of Biomedical Engineering at Texas A&M University
Atul Gawande, professor in the Department of Health Policy & Management at Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Swapan K. Gayen, professor of physics at the City University of New York
Anirvan Ghosh, professor at the University of California, San Diego
Radhika Govindrajan, associate professor of anthropology at University of Washington
Vijay Govindarajan, Coxe Distinguished Professor at Dartmouth College's Tuck School of Business and the Marvin Bower Fellow at Harvard Business School
Kausalya Hart, scholar of Tamil language at University of California, Berkeley
Narayan Hosmane, professor of chemistry and biochemistry at Northern Illinois University
Ashish Jha, Dean of Brown University School of Public Health
Ravi Jagannathan, professor at the Kellogg School of Management
Jainendra K. Jain, professor of physics at Pennsylvania State University
Piyare Jain, professor emeritus at University at Buffalo
Prema Kurien, professor of sociology at the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs of Syracuse University
Rakesh Jain, professor of tumor biology at Massachusetts General Hospital in the Harvard Medical School
S. Lochlann Jain, associate professor in the Anthropology Department at Stanford University
Sachin H. Jain, physician and health policy analyst at Harvard Medical School
Nazir Jairazbhoy, professor of folk and classical music of South Asia at University of California, Los Angeles
Yogesh Jaluria, Board of Governors Professor and Distinguished Professor at Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, in the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering.
M. A. Muqtedar Khan, Professor in the Department of Political Science and International Relations at the University of Delaware
Ravindra Khattree, professor of statistics at Oakland University
Satish Nagarajaiah, professor of civil engineering and of mechanical engineering at Rice University.
S. P. Kothari, Gordon Y Billard Professor of Management at MIT Sloan School of Management
Shrinivas Kulkarni, professor of astrophysics and planetary science at California Institute of Technology
Vijay Mahajan (academic), John P. Harbin Centennial Chair in Business and Professor of Marketing at University of Texas at Austin
Raj Mittra, electrical engineering professor at Pennsylvania State University
Jagadeesh Moodera, American physicist of Indian origin; senior research scientist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Francis Bitter Magnet Laboratory
Bharati Mukherjee, author, professor in the department of English at the University of California, Berkeley
C. M. Naim, scholar of Urdu language and literature at the University of Chicago
V. Parmeswaran Nair, Physicist, currently a Distinguished Professor at City University of New York.
Shrikanth Narayanan, award-winning researcher, inventor and educator at University of Southern California
Jaishree Odin, professor, postmodern literary theorist at the University of Hawaiʻi
C.K. Prahalad, professor of corporate strategy at the Stephen M. Ross School of Business in the University of Michigan
Vijay Prashad, professor of international studies at Trinity College
Vilayanur S. Ramachandran, behavioral neurologist and psychophysicist; Professor with the Psychology and Neurosciences University of California, San Diego
A. Hari Reddi, distinguished professor and Lawrence J. Ellison Endowed Chair in Musculoskeletal Molecular Biology at the University of California, Davis
J. N. Reddy, professor and holder of the Oscar S. Wyatt Endowed Chair in Mechanical Engineering at Texas A&M University
Anantanand Rambachan, professor of religion at St. Olaf College, Minnesota, United States
K. R. Rao, professor at University of Texas at Arlington
Subrata Roy, professor of aerospace engineering at the University of Florida
Subir Sachdev, Herchel Smith Professor of Physics at Harvard University; Dirac Medal and National Academy of Sciences
Nitin Samarth, Head and Professor of Physics, Pennsylvania State University
Jagdish Sheth, professor of marketing at Goizueta Business School of Emory University
Jagdish Shukla, professor at George Mason University
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, professor at Columbia University
Marti G. Subrahmanyam, professor of finance at the Stern School of Business at New York University
Sanjay Subrahmanyam, holder of Navin and Pratima Doshi Chair of Indian History and scholar at University of California, Los Angeles
Mriganka Sur, professor of neuroscience at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Medha Yodh, scholar of classical Indian dance at University of California, Los Angeles
Venkatesh Shankar, Ford Chair in Marketing and E-Commerce, Texas A&M University


== Activism and philanthropy ==
Rajiv Malhotra, Hindutva activist for promoting Indic cultures, author of Breaking India and the founder of Infinity Foundation
Maya Ajmera, founder of The Global Fund for Children and author of more than 20 books for children
Kala Bagai, immigrant advocate and one of the first South Asian women in the United States
Vaishno Das Bagai, Ghadar party member, associated with the struggle for U.S. citizenship
Bhairavi Desai, founding member of the Taxi Workers Alliance in New York
Kartar Dhillon, Ghadar Party, labor, and civil rights activist
Mallika Dutt, executive director of Breakthrough human rights organization
Vijaya Lakshmi Emani (1958–2009), social activist
Arun Manilal Gandhi, fifth grandson of Mohandas Gandhi
Meera Gandhi, founder and CEO of The Giving Back Foundation
Abraham George, philanthropist humanitarian, founder of The George Foundation (TGF)
Gitanjali S. Gutierrez, lawyer who is defending Guantanamo prisoners
Maya Harris, of half Indian descent, executive director of the ACLU of Northern California and sister of Kamala Harris
Prerna Lal, immigrant rights advocate and attorney
Hemant Mehta - atheist activist, YouTuber and writer
Girindra Mukerji, leader of one of the first Indian-American student protests against colonialism in 1908
Kavita Ramdas, president and CEO of Global Fund for Women
Dinesh Sharma, leader, CRO and Director at Steam Works Studio and author in human development, human rights and global education, and professor at Fordham, New York University, and Walden University
Inder Singh, chairman of the Global Organization of People of Indian Origin (GOPIO)
Bhagat Singh Thind, civil rights activist who defended the right of Indian immigrants to gain United States citizenship in United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind
Urvashi Vaid, gay rights activist
Thomas Abraham (b. 1948), founder president of the Global Organization of People of Indian Origin (GOPIO) as well as the National Federation of Indian American Associations (NFIA)
Sakharam Ganesh Pandit (1875–1959), lawyer who argued against government efforts to revoke American citizenship for Indian emigrants
Surendran Pattel, lawyer who is a judge for the 240th Texas District Court in Fort Bend County since 2023


== Arts, media, and entertainment ==

 

Ashok Amritraj, Hollywood film producer
Alok Vaid-Menon, writer, performance artist, media personality
Salma Arastu, artist
San Banarje, independent filmmaker
Rina Banerjee, artist
Prashant Bhargava, director
Niala Boodhoo, journalist, host, and executive producer
Lesley-Ann Brandt, actress
Jay Chandrasekhar, director, actor, comedian, and writer
Shanthi Chandrasekar, visual artist
Aneesh Chaganty, film director, screenwriter
Sabu Dastagir, actor
Nina Davuluri, Miss America 2014
India de Beaufort, actress
Sharad Devarajan, superhero creator, producer, writer
Param Gill, director, screenwriter and producer
Kovid Gupta, bestselling author and screenwriter
RK DreamWest, film director, screenwriter, cinematographer
Reef Karim, actor, director, writer, and producer
Neeraj Khemlani, producer for CBS News' 60 Minutes
Bharti Kirchner, writer
Shirish Korde, artist
Adam Bhala Lough, director, screenwriter
Tirlok Malik, filmmaker and actor
Dharminder Mann, entrepreneur, film producer and YouTuber.
Benny Mathews, film and music video director
Faris McReynolds, painter and musician
Meera Menon, director, writer, and editor
Mira Nair, director and producer
Sunil Nayar, TV writer and producer; producer of CSI: Miami
Oopali Operajita, choreographer and Odissi and Bharatanatyam artiste; Distinguished Fellow, Carnegie Mellon University
Yatin Patel, photographer and artist
Mythili Prakash, Bharatanatyam dancer and choreographer
Asha Puthli, singer-songwriter, producer and actress
Sarayu Rao, actor and director
Harish Saluja, filmmaker
Stephanie Sengupta, producer and writer
Mehul Shah, actor, director, writer, and producer
Adi Shankar, producer and actor
Naren Shankar, TV writer, producer and director; an executive producer of CSI: Crime Scene Investigation
M. Night Shyamalan, director, filmmaker
Ishana Night Shyamalan, filmmaker, screenwriter and producer
Tarsem Singh, director
Rohit Gupta, director, producer
Manick Sorcar, animator, artist, and producer
Babu Subramaniam, director
Tina Sugandh, entertainer
Julie Titus, model, contestant on America's Next Top Model
Serena Varghese, voice actress
Prashanth Venkataramanujam, television writer, actor, and producer
Hasna Sal, glass sculptor, architect, artist and author


=== Actors and actresses ===

Karan Soni, actor
Babu Antony, actor
Utkarsh Ambudkar, actor
Simran Judge, actor
Ravi Patel, actor
Devika Bhise, actress
Naveen Andrews, actor
Tatyana Ali, actress
Waris Ahluwalia, fashion designer
Aziz Ansari, actor and comedian
Gabrielle Anwar, actress
Erick Avari, actor
Sunkrish Bala, actor
Firdous Bamji, actor
Purva Bedi, actress
Anjali Bhimani, actress
Summer Bishil, actress
Karan Brar, film and TV actor
Samrat Chakrabarti, actor
Melanie Chandra, actress
Michelle Khare, actress, YouTuber, and television host
Sabu Dastagir, actor
Sujata Day, actress
Manish Dayal, actor
Noureen DeWulf, actress
Raja Fenske, actor
Janina Gavankar, actress
Jacob Gregory, actor
Namrata Singh Gujral, actress
Sakina Jaffrey, actress
Anu Emmanuel, actress
Poorna Jagannathan, actress and producer
Avan Jogia, actor
Avantika Vandanapu, actress and dancer. Known for her role in 2021 film, Spin
Mindy Kaling, actress, writer, producer, comedian
Ravi Kapoor, actor
Rahul Kohli, actor
Deep Katdare, actor
Nivedita Kulkarni, actress
Shishir Kurup, actor
Akansha Ranjan Kapoor, actress
Nakul Dev Mahajan, Bollywood dancer and choreographer
Sunny Leone, actor and former pornographic actress
Tirlok Malik, actor
Shelley Malil, film and TV actor
Rizwan Manji, actor
Aasif Mandvi, actor
Sunita Mani, actress
Ajay Mehta, TV actor
Ajay Naidu, actor
Anjul Nigam, actor
Maulik Pancholy, actor
Devika Parikh, actress
Kal Penn, actor
Danny Pudi, actor
Ritesh Rajan, actor
Sendhil Ramamurthy, actor
Dileep Rao, actor
Sarayu Rao, actor
Navi Rawat, actress
Sonal Shah, actress
Sheetal Sheth, actress
Zenobia Shroff, Indian-American actress and comedienne
Tiya Sircar, actress
Errol Sitahal, actor
Kapil Talwalkar, actor
Omi Vaidya, actor
Sugith Varughese, Indian-born Canadian actor with American citizenship
Naren Weiss, actor and playwright
Annet Mahendru, actress
Nitya Vidyasagar, actress
Nandana Sen, actress
Pooja Batra, actress
Monica Dogra, actress
Deepti Naval, actress


=== Comedians ===

Aziz Ansari
Aman Ali
Arj Barker
Gerry Bednob
Aasif Mandvi
Jay Chandrasekhar
Hari Kondabolu
Hasan Minhaj
Nimesh Patel
Adam Mamawala
Rajiv Satyal
Akaash Singh
Anish Shah
Paul Varghese, appeared on Last Comic Standing
Aparna Nancherla
Zarna Garg, comedian and lawyer


=== Culinary arts ===

Ashok Bajaj, restaurateur
Vishwesh Bhatt, chef
Maneet Chauhan, celebrity chef, restaurateur, author
H. Jay Dinshah, founded the American Vegan Society
Raghavan Iyer, chef, author, culinary educator
Vikas Khanna, Michelin starred celebrity chef, restaurateur, author, filmmaker, and TV host
Jehangir Mehta, celebrity chef, restaurateur, author
Rajat Parr, sommelier
Suvir Saran, Michelin starred chef and author
Aarti Sequeira (b. 1978), TV host on Food Network
Vikram Sunderam (b. 1967), chef and author
Padma Lakshmi


=== Fashion ===
Naeem Khan
Vashtie Kola, of half Indian descent
Bibhu Mohapatra
Rachel Roy
Sachin & Babi
Vinoodh Matadin


=== Models ===
Anchal Joseph, contestant on Cycle 7 of America's Next Top Model
Pooja Kumar, model
Akshay Kapoor, model, actor


=== Media ===

Rajan Devadas, photojournalist
Manu Raju (b. 1980), CNN journalist anchor, reporter
Deepak Ananthapadmanabha, online journalist
Sanjay Gupta, journalist, medical correspondent, neurosurgeon
Rajiv Chandrasekaran, assistant managing editor for continuous news, The Washington Post; author of Imperial Life in the Emerald City
Syma Chowdhry, television host, reporter, and producer
Priya David, correspondent for CBS News
Dinesh D'Souza, political commentator, author and filmmaker. Former president of The King's College, New York
Deepa Fernandes, host of the WBAI radio program Wakeup Call
Deepti Hajela, journalist for the Associated Press
Pico Iyer, author and journalist for Time magazine, Harper's Magazine, Condé Nast Traveler, and The New York Review of Books
Shibani Joshi, reporter for the Fox Business Network
Suma Josson, journalist and filmmaker
Sukanya Krishnan, news anchor for CW 11 Morning News on WPIX
Raj Mathai, television journalist
Seema Mody, news reporter/anchor for CNBC
Mish Michaels, meteorologist for the WBZ-TV Weather Team
Vinita Nair, anchor of World News Now and America This Morning on ABC
Kevin Negandhi, sports anchor for ESPN SportsCenter
Reena Ninan, Middle East correspondent for Fox News Channel
Asra Nomani, journalist
Safiya Nygaard, YouTube beauty creator
Uma Pemmaraju, senior news anchor for Fox News Channel
Ramesh Ponnuru, senior editor of the National Review magazine
Ash-har Quraishi, correspondent, WTTW Chicago; former KCTV Chief Investigative Reporter; former CNN Islamabad Bureau Chief
Gopal Raju, pioneer of Indian American ethnic media
Aneesh Raman, first Indian-American presidential speechwriter under President Barack Obama, former CNN Middle East correspondent
Alpana Singh, television personality
Lakshmi Singh, NPR's national midday newscaster
Hari Sreenivasan, correspondent for CBS News and the PBS NewsHour
Sreenath Sreenivasan, Columbia University professor; WABC-TV technology reporter
Ali Velshi, business news anchor for CNN
Zain Verjee, CNN anchor
Rohit Vyas, first and longest serving Indian American broadcast journalist
Fareed Zakaria, columnist for Time magazine and host of Fareed Zakaria GPS on CNN
Lilly Singh, YouTuber of Indian descent widely known as IISuperwomanII, ranked tenth on the Forbes list of the world's highest paid YouTube stars, ranked first on 2017 Forbes Top Influencers List in the entertainment category
Liza Koshy, actress, YouTube comedian and television host
Ambreen Tariq, author, activist and founder of @BrownPeopleCamping


=== Musicians ===

Rick Parashar (1963–2014), producer
Sandeep Das (b. 1971), won the Grammy award for Best World Music Album, at the 59th Grammy Awards, 2017
Sonika Vaid, singer
Bamboo Shoots, dance-rock band
6ix, record producer
Rajiv Dhall, singer
Sid Sriram, singer
Jeff Bhasker, producer
Nicki Minaj, rapper and singer-songwriter of half Indian descent
Sameer Bhattacharya, one of two guitarists in the Texas alternative rock band Flyleaf
Das Racist, alternative hip hop group; two of the three members are Indian
Anoop Desai, finalist on the eighth season of American Idol
Falu, singer and songwriter
Sameer Gadhia, lead vocalist in Young the Giant
Terry Vivkeanand Gajraj, chutney-soca singer
Heems, rapper
Ravi Hutheesing, singer-songwriter, guitarist
iLoveMakonnen, rapper
Daya, singer
Raja Kumari, singer and songwriter
Vijay Iyer, jazz musician and composer
Sunny Jain, dhol player, drummer, and composer
Norah Jones, singer, songwriter and actress; winner of multiple Grammy Awards
Raleigh Rajan, Music Composer, Songwriter and multi instrumentalist
Karsh Kale, producer, composer and musician
Tony Kanal, two-time Grammy Award winner, bass player for No Doubt
Appu Krishnan, known professionally as The Professor, music producer and songwriter
Ashok Kondabolu, rapper (also known as Dapwell)
Savan Kotecha, songwriter
KSHMR, electronic musician, record producer
Arun Luthra, jazz musician
Sanjaya Malakar, finalist on the sixth season of American Idol
Mathai, finalist on season 2 of The Voice
Zarin Mehta, executive director of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra
Zubin Mehta, former conductor, New York Philharmonic Orchestra; receiver of a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame
Sanjay Mishra, guitarist and composer
Rachika Nayar, musician
Thara Prashad, R&B singer and model of half Indian descent
Vidya Vox, YouTube musician
Vasant Rai, performer of Indian music
Rhea Raj, singer and songwriter
Saleka, singer-songwriter and actress
Paul Sabu, producer
Amar Sandhu, singer
Shaheen Sheik, songwriter
Bikram Singh, singer
Mickey Singh, singer from Detroit, MI
Justine Skye, singer
Ramesh Srivastava, singer
Ambi Subramaniam, violinist and composer
Bindu Subramaniam, singer-songwriter
Kim Thayil, named among 100th greatest guitarists of all time by Rolling Stone
Rozonda Thomas, singer
Zoya, California-based singer and guitarist
Sanjay Patel, animator and director and also illustrator of Pixar
Shirish Korde (b. 1945), composer
Raveena Aurora, alternative singer and songwriter
Olivia, singer
Lisa Mishra, singer and actress


== Business ==
Aditya Agarwal, former CTO of Dropbox
Parag Agrawal, former CEO of Twitter
Revathi Advaithi, CEO of Flex
Anu Aiyengar, Managing Director of North American Mergers and Acquisitions of JPMorgan Chase & Co
Nikesh Arora (b. 1968), CEO, Palo Alto Networks, former Google executive and COO, Softbank
Samir Arora, former CEO of Mode Media
Ramani Ayer, former Chairman and CEO of The Hartford Financial Services Group
Sunny Balwani, former President and Chief Operating Officer of Theranos
Steve Banerjee, Co-founder of Chippendales
Prith Banerjee, Managing Director of Global Technology R&D at Accenture
Ajay Banga, President and CEO of MasterCard
Mahaboob Ben Ali (1927–2009), Co-Founder of Ben's Chili Bowl
Krishna Bharat, Computer Scientist and Founder of Google News
Manoj Bhargava, Founder and CEO of Innovations Ventures LLC; the company is known for producing the 5-hour Energy drink
Baiju Bhatt, Founder of Aetherflux and Co-founder and Co-CEO of Robinhood
Sabeer Bhatia, Co-Founder of Hotmail
Aneel Bhusri, co-founder and CEO of Workday, Inc.; partner at Greylock Partners; member of the board of directors of Intel
Jagjeet (Jeet) S. Bindra, director of Edison International, Southern California Edison
Sanjit Biswas, co-founder of Cisco Meraki and Samsara (company)
Amar Bose, founder and chairman of Bose Corporation
Vanu Bose, American electrical engineer, founder of Vanu Inc, son of Amar Bose
Gurbaksh Chahal, Founder of ClickAgent and BlueLithium
Sant Singh Chatwal, owner of the Bombay Palace chain of restaurants and Hampshire Hotels & Resorts
Jay Chaudhry, co-founder of Zscaler
Manu Daftary, money manager
Bharat Desai, co-founder and chairman of Syntel
Gururaj Deshpande, founder of Sycamore Networks
Francis deSouza, CEO of Illumina
Anirudh Devgan, CEO and President of Cadence Design Systems
Vinod Dham, designed the Intel Pentium Chip Processor; the "father of the Pentium Chip"
Rono Dutta, former president of United Airlines, chairman of Air Sahara
Rhona Fox, founder of Fox Fuse
Amrapali Gan, marketing executive and former CEO of OnlyFans
Rakesh Gangwal, former CEO and chairman of US Airways Group
Asim Ghosh, president and chief executive officer at Husky Energy
Srinivas (Srini) Gopalan, CEO of T-Mobile
Ajit Gupta, founder and CEO of Speedera Networks, Aryaka Networks
Rajat Gupta, former managing director of McKinsey & Company
Rajiv Gupta, CEO of SkyHigh Networks, former general manager of Hewlett-Packard
Umang Gupta, former CEO of Keynote Systems, Inc.
Ajit Jain, president of Berkshire Hathaway Reinsurance Group
Anjli Jain, founder and Managing Partner of EVC Ventures
Ankur Jain, Founder of Kairos HQ & VP of Product at Tinder (app)
Anshu Jain, President of Cantor Fitzgerald and former co-CEO of Deutsche Bank
Naveen Jain, Chairman of Moon Express
Sanjay Jha, CEO of Global Foundries and former CEO of Motorola Mobile Devices
Vyomesh Joshi, former executive vice president of Imaging and Printing Group, Hewlett-Packard
John Kapoor, founder and executive chairman of Insys Therapeutics
Vimal Kapur, CEO of Honeywell
Reshma Kewalramani, CEO and president of Vertex Pharmaceuticals
Vinod Khosla, founder of Khosla Ventures, co-founder of Sun Microsystems
Arvind Krishna, CEO of IBM
Anil Kumar, former senior partner and chairman, Asia Center of McKinsey & Company
Sanjay Kumar, former CEO of Computer Associates International
George Kurian, business executive; chief executive officer and a member of the board of NetApp; previously executive vice president of product operations at NetApp
Thomas Kurian, CEO of Google Cloud and former President of product development at Oracle Corporation
Sachin Lawande, president and CEO of Visteon
Krishna Maharaj, businessman convicted of murder
Apoorva Mehta, Founder of Instacart
Sonny Mehta, Chairman/Editor in chief of Alfred A. Knopf
Sanjay Mehrotra, Co-Founder of SanDisk and CEO of Micron
Victor Menezes, chairman of Clearing House Association, former chairman and CEO of Citibank
Neal Mohan, CEO of YouTube
Satya Nadella, CEO of Microsoft
Leena Nair, CEO of Chanel
Lakshmi Narayanan, vice chairman and former CEO of Cognizant Corporation
Laxman Narasimhan, CEO of Starbucks
Vasant Narasimhan, CEO of Novartis
Shantanu Narayen, CEO of Adobe Systems
Reena Ninan, Owner of Good Trouble Productions
Indra Nooyi, former chairman and CEO of PepsiCo
Dinesh Paliwal, chairman and CEO of Harman International
Vikram Pandit, former CEO of Citigroup
Sankaet Pathak, founder of Synapse Financial Technologies and Foundation robotics
Suhas Patil, entrepreneur, venture capitalist & Founder of Cirrus Logic
David C. Paul, Billionaire and Founder and executive chairman of Globus Medical
Sundar Pichai, CEO of Google, Alphabet Inc
Dev Pragad, President and CEO of Newsweek
Stanley Praimnath, bank executive and survivor of the September 11 attacks
Prakash Puram, president and CEO of iXmatch
Vivek Ramaswamy, founder of Roivant Sciences, candidate in the 2024 Republican Party presidential primaries
Vivek Ranadivé, former CEO of TIBCO Software
Naval Ravikant, co-founder, chairman and former CEO of AngelList, investor, and entrepreneur
Sashi Reddi, serial entrepreneur, venture capitalist, angel investor, technologist, and philanthropist
Kanwal Rekhi, former EVP and CTO of Novell
Punit Renjen, Former CEO of Deloitte
Abbas Sadriwala, chairman and CEO of the Fort Lauderdale-based Wireless Logix Group
Arun Sarin, former president of Vodafone
Ashutosh Saxena, Founder & CEO of Caspar.AI, prolific author in the area of AI, and former professor of Computer Science at Cornell University.
Arjun Sethi, founder of Tribe Capital and CEO of Kraken
Neerja Sethi, Billionaire and Co-Founded IT consulting and outsourcing firm Syntel
Niraj Shah, CEO and co-founder of Wayfair
Deven Sharma, former president of Standard & Poor's
Ram Shriram, venture fund capitalist and one of the first investors in Google
Pradeep Sindhu, founder and CTO of Juniper Networks
Jagdeep Singh, Founder of QuantumScape, optical hardware company Lightera Networks, and telecommunications company Infinera
Ravi Kumar Singisetti, CEO of Cognizant
K. R. Sridhar, founder and CEO of Bloom Energy
Aravind Srinivas, Co-Founder, President & CEO of Perplexity AI
Balaji Srinivasan, Co-founder of Counsyl, former CTO of Coinbase, and former general partner at Andreessen Horowitz
Raj Subramaniam, CEO and President of FedEx Corporation
Anjali Sud, CEO of Tubi and Former CEO of Vimeo
Rajeev Suri, CEO of Nokia
Dhivya Suryadevara, CEO of Optum Financial, part of UnitedHealth Group
Abhi Talwalkar, president and CEO of LSI Corporation
Chandrika Tandon, Businesswoman and Artist
Jayshree Ullal, Billionaire and CEO and president of Arista Networks
Jay Vijayan, founder of Tekion Corp, former CIO of Tesla
Romesh Wadhwani, founder, chairman and CEO of Symphony Technology Group
Padmasree Warrior, former CEO of Nio (car company) USA


== Crime ==
Steve Banerjee, convicted arsonist, racketeer, and murderer
Sant Singh Chatwal, pled guilty to giving illegal campaign contributions for the Democratic Party
Gurmeet Singh Dhinsa, convicted murderer, racketeer, and kidnapper
Syed Ghulam Nabi Fai, convicted of espionage for Pakistan
Rajat Gupta, convicted financial fraudster who participated in the Galleon scandal
Noshir Gowadia, convicted of espionage for China
Anand Jon, convicted rapist
John Kapoor, convicted financial fraudster
Subhash Kapoor, convicted of art theft and grand larceny
Anil Kumar, convicted financial fraudster
Shelley Malil, convicted of attempted premeditated murder and assault
Nirav Modi, fugitive charged with corruption, fraud, and money laundering
Jayant Patel, convicted of fraud and manslaughter
Purvi Patel, convicted and later acquitted of feticide
Lakireddy Bali Reddy, convicted human trafficker and immigration fraudster
Prakashanand Saraswati, fugitive and convicted child molester
Ravi Singh, convicted of four felony counts for illegally influencing the San Diego mayoral election
Sabrina De Sousa, convicted kidnapper
Sneha Anne Philip, missing person
Dinesh D'Souza Political criminal, campaign finance violations


== Literature ==

Abraham Verghese, doctor and author; wrote In My Own Country and My Tennis Partner
Agha Shahid Ali, poet
Aimee Nezhukumatathil, poet
Alka Joshi, author
Amitav Ghosh, Indo-nostalgic writer and winner of Prix Médicis étranger
Anita Desai, novelist; shortlisted for the Booker Prize three times; mother of Kiran Desai
Anju Hasan, author, of Neti, Neti
Anu Garg, author, speaker, and computer engineer
Arnold Rampersad, biographer and literary critic
Bhaskar Sunkara, political writer, founding editor and publisher of Jacobin and current publisher of London's Tribune
Bharati Mukherjee, author, professor
Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni, author
Davan Maharaj, journalist and former editor-in-chief and publisher of the Los Angeles Times
Dhan Gopal Mukerji, first successful Indian man of letters in the US; winner of the Newbery Medal, 1928
Gaiutra Bahadur, author
Ghalib Shiraz Dhalla, author
Gita Mehta, author
Harischandra Khemraj, writer
Indira Ganesan, novelist
Indira Viswanathan Peterson, literary critic
Indu Sundaresan, author
Ismat Chughtai, author
Ismith Khan, author and educator
Jhumpa Lahiri, Pulitzer Prize-winning author
Kaavya Viswanathan, novelist
Kiran Desai, winner of the 2006 Man Booker Prize
Meena Alexander, poet, scholar, and writer
Mira Jacob, writer
Parag Khanna, author
Paul Kalanithi, author
Rajiv Joseph, playwright
Rajiv Mohabir, poet
Ramya Ramana, poet
Ravi Batra, bestselling author and economist
Ravi Shankar, poet
Rishi Reddi, author
Roshani Chokshi novelist
Rupi Kaur, poet
S. T. Joshi, literary critic
Salman Rushdie, novelist and essayist
Sandhya Menon, author
Sanjena Sathian, novelist and journalist
Sarah Thankam Mathews, novelist
Saumitra Saxena, Hindi poet, Bharatiya Jnanpith Navlekhana Award winner
Shanthi Sekaran, novelist and educator
Shauna Singh Baldwin, novelist, winner of the Commonwealth Writers' Prize
Siddharth Katragadda, author, filmmaker, artist
Siddhartha Mukherjee, physician, scientist and writer, 2011 winner of the Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction
Susham Bedi, author
Tania James, novelist
Thrity Umrigar, author of Bombay Time
Tulika Mehrotra, author, journalist
Usha Haley, author
Vijay Prashad, Marxist writer, director for Tricontinental, Chief editor for LeftWord Books, written 30 books
Vijay Seshadri, Pulitzer Prize-winning poet and essayist
Vikram Seth, poet, novelist, travel writer, librettist, children's writer, biographer and memoirist


== Military ==
Uday Singh Taunque, first Indian American to die in Operation Iraqi Freedom; posthumously awarded Bronze Star and Purple Heart gallantry awards
Sunita Williams (b. 1965), astronaut and former Navy officer
Kareem Rashad Sultan Khan, United States Army specialist who was killed during Operation Iraqi Freedom and a recipient of the Bronze Star Medal and Purple Heart for his service


== Politics and government ==
Stanley George, political strategist, known for his advisory role in the U.S. Republican Party and close association with President Donald Trump's political campaigns; also biographer


=== Elected officials ===

John Abraham, former mayor of Teaneck, New Jersey (Republican)
Abbas Akhil, former member of the New Mexico House of Representatives (Democratic)
Saqib Ali, former member of the Maryland House of Delegates (Democratic)
Nida Allam, Durham County Commissioner (Democratic)
Harvinder "Harry" Anand, mayor of Laurel Hollow, New York (Republican)
Niraj Antani - Ohio state senator (Republican)
Harry Arora, former member of the Connecticut House of Representatives (Republican)
Sam Arora, former member of the Maryland House of Delegates (Democratic)
Kumar P. Barve, former member of the Maryland House of Delegates, former (majority leader) (Democratic), the first Indian American elected to a state legislature.
Ravinder Bhalla, mayor, Hoboken, Hudson County, New Jersey (Democratic), the first turban-wearing Sikh American mayor in the United States to be elected by a municipality's residents, in November 2017.
Satveer Chaudhary, former Minnesota State Senator (Democratic)
Upendra J. Chivukula, former member of the New Jersey General Assembly, former Mayor of Franklin Township, New Jersey,Deputy Mayor of Franklin Township, New Jersey, member of the Franklin Township Council (Democratic)
Jeremy Cooney, member of the New York State Senate (Democratic)
Swati Dandekar (b. 1951), former member of the Iowa Senate, member of the Iowa House of Representatives (Democratic)
Mona Das, former member of the Washington Senate (Democratic)
Manka Dhingra, member of the Washington Senate (Democratic)
Mervyn M. Dymally, 41st Lieutenant Governor of California (1975–1979); member of the U.S. House of Representatives (1981–1993) (Democratic)
Sara Gideon - former Speaker of the Maine House of Representatives (Democrat)
Kashmir Gill, mayor of Yuba City, California, first Indian-American mayor in CA and first Sikh mayor in the US (Republican)
Vin Gopal, took office in 2018 to represent the 11th Legislative District in the New Jersey Senate (Democratic)
Jay Goyal, member of the Ohio State Representative (Democratic)
Raj Goyle, member of the Kansas State Representative (Democratic)
Ghazala Hashmi, member of the Virginia Senate (Democratic)
Faz Husain, first native of India to win elected office in Michigan (Democratic)
Susheela Jayapal, first Indian American to hold an elected office at the county level in Oregon, served as a county commissioner for Multnomah County, Oregon (Democratic)
Bobby Jindal, 55th governor of Louisiana (2008–2016); member of the U.S. House of Representatives (2005–2008), Assistant Secretary of Health and Human Services for Planning and Evaluation (2001–2003) (Republican)
Ash Kalra, member of the California State Assembly for the 27th district from 2016–2022 and 25th district since 2022, member of the San Jose City Council from 2009–2016
Nima Kulkarni, member of the Kentucky House of Representatives (Democratic)
Sabi "Doc" Kumar, member of the Tennessee House of Representatives (Republican)
Padma Kuppa, former member of the Michigan House of Representatives (2019–2022)
Zohran Mamdani, member of the New York State Assembly from the 36th district since 2021 and Mayor of New York City from January 2026; son of Indian-American filmmaker Mira Nair.
Sanjeev Manohar, member of the New Hampshire House of Representatives (Democratic)
Nimi McConigley, first Indian American women to serve in any American State legislature served in the Wyoming State Legislature from 1994 until 1996 (Republican)
Aruna Miller, 10th Lt. Governor of Maryland and the first South Asian woman elected lieutenant governor in the United States, (Democratic)
Raj Mukherji, member of the New Jersey Senate, former member of the New Jersey General Assembly, Deputy Mayor of Jersey City, New Jersey, and Commissioner and Chairman of the Jersey City Housing Authority (Democratic)
Ameya Pawar, served as the alderman for the 47th Ward of the City of Chicago.
Aftab Pureval, mayor of Cincinnati (Democrat)
Jenifer Rajkumar, member of the New York State Assembly (Democratic), representing the 38th district in Queens.
Nithya Raman, politician serving as the Los Angeles City Council member for the 4th District since 2020; member of the Democratic Party and the Democratic Socialists of America; also urban planner and activist (Democratic)
Harpreet Sandhu, former member of the Richmond, California City Council (Democratic)
Kshama Sawant, former member of the Seattle City Council (Socialist Alternative)
Harry Sidhu, Mayor of Anaheim, California, member of the Anaheim City Council (Republican)
Balvir Singh, member of the New Jersey General Assembly, first Indian American member, Board of Chosen Freeholders, Burlington County, New Jersey, first Sikh American to win a countywide election in New Jersey, in November 2017 (Democratic)
Vandana Slatter, member of the Washington State Senate since 2025, member of the Washington House of Representatives from 2017–2025
Kannan Srinivasan, member of the Virginia Senate, former member of the Virginia House of Delegates (Democratic)
Saggy Tahir, former member of the New Hampshire House of Representatives from 2001 until 2011 (Republican)
Kevin Thomas, represented the 6th district in the New York State Senate from 2019 until 2024 (Democratic)
Ram Villivalam- State Senator, 8th District- Illinois (Democrat)


=== Federal elected officials ===

Kamala Harris (b. 1964), 49th Vice President of the United States, former and 32nd California Attorney General, former U.S. Senator from California
Ami Bera, U.S. Representative for California's 6th congressional district
Shri Thanedar, U.S. Representative for Michigan's 13th congressional district
Raja Krishnamoorthi, U.S. Representative for Illinois's 8th congressional district
Ro Khanna, U.S. Representative for California's 17th congressional district
Pramila Jayapal, U.S. Representative for Washington's 7th congressional district
Suhas Subramanyam, U.S. Representative for Virginia's 10th congressional district
Dalip Singh Saund, first Asian and Indian American member of the U.S. House of Representatives from California


=== Civil servants ===

Arif Alikhan (b. 1968), former Assistant Secretary for Policy Development at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security; former Deputy Mayor for Homeland Security and Public Safety for the City of Los Angeles; former senior adviser to Attorneys General John Ashcroft and Alberto Gonzales
Preeta D. Bansal (b. 1965), member and past chair of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom; former Solicitor General of New York
Cathy Bissoon, judge for the United States District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania (Democratic)
Nisha Desai Biswal, former Assistant Secretary of State for South and Central Asian Affairs
Saikat Chakrabarti, chief of staff to Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the U.S. representative from New York's 14th congressional district representing parts of The Bronx and Queens in New York City
Joy Cherian, first Asian head of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
Aneesh Chopra, former (inaugural) Federal Chief Technology Officer of the U.S.
Har Dayal, founder of the Ghadar Party
Sabrina De Sousa, ex-Central Intelligence Agency officer; is suing the United States government for diplomatic immunity
Gurbir Grewal, Bergen County, New Jersey prosecutor, first Sikh American county prosecutor in the U.S.,
Vanita Gupta, Former Lawyer for American Civil Liberties Union and former United States Associate Attorney General
Nikki Haley, former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of South Carolina (Republican)
Rashad Hussain, U.S. Special Envoy to the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation
Neel Kashkari, former interim Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Financial Stability in the United States Department of the Treasury (Republican)
Neal Katyal, former acting Solicitor General of the United States
Atul Keshap, former U.S. Ambassador to Sri Lanka and Maldives
Gopal Khanna, chief information officer of Minnesota
Narayana Kocherlakota, president of Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Kris Kolluri, New Jersey Commissioner of Transportation
Vivek Kundra, Federal Chief Information Officer of the US
Arun Majumdar, director of the U.S. Department of Energy's Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy
Raj Mukherji (b. 1984), Deputy Mayor of Jersey City, New Jersey; candidate for the New Jersey State Legislature
Ajit Pai, former chairman of the Federal Communications Commission
Farah Pandith, Special Representative to Muslim Communities for the United States Department of State
Kash Patel. director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
Rachel Paulose, former United States Attorney for the District of Minnesota
Rajiv Shah (b. 1973), former Under Secretary of Agriculture for Research, Education, and Economics; former Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development; President, Rockefeller Foundation
Sonal Shah, member of the Obama-Biden Transition Project advisory board
Islam A. Siddiqui, Chief Agricultural Negotiator in the Office of the United States Trade Representative
Daleep Singh, former U.S. Deputy National Security Advisor; former Executive Vice President & Head of Markets at New York Fed
Sabita Singh, first judge of Indian descent in Massachusetts history
Subra Suresh, director of National Science Foundation
Vinai Thummalapally (b. 1954), served as U.S. Ambassador to Belize
Usha Vance, Second Lady of the United States
Richard Verma (b. 1968), Assistant Secretary for Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs, at the Department of State and Deputy Secretary of State for Management and Resources at the Department of State
Surya Yalamanchili, 2010 US Congressional candidate
Lahori Ram - First Indo-American to be appointed as the Economic Development Commissioner of California.


=== Federal judges ===
Vince Girdhari Chhabria, judge of the United States District Court for the Northern District of California
Nicholas Ranjan, District Judge, United States District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania
Neomi Rao, judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
Manish S. Shah, judge of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois
Indira Talwani, judge of the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts
Amul Thapar, judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
Cathy Bissoon, judge of the United States District Court for the Western District of Pennsylvania
Satnam Rattu - Indian origin judge of the Superior Court of Sacramento County in California.
Neetu Badhan Smith - First Sikh woman judge in the United States.
Amit Mehta - United States District Court for the District of Columbia
Sri Srinivasan, chief United States circuit judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit


== Religion and spirituality ==
Bikram Choudhury (b. 1944), yoga guru and founder of Bikram Yoga
Eknath Easwaran, spiritual teacher, author, and translator of Indian religious texts such as the Bhagavad Gita and the Upanishads
Earl K. Fernandes, Bishop-Elect of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Columbus
Chitrabhanu Jain, founded the Jain Meditation International Center in Manhattan, New York CityHarbhajan Singh Khalsa, introduced Kundalini Yoga and Sikhism to the US
Padmanabh Jaini, scholar of Jainism
Harbhajan Singh Khalsa, introduced Kundalini Yoga and Sikhism to the US
Sushil Kumarji, Jain Acharya
Dipa Ma, yoga teacher
Eboo Patel, member of the New Faith Advisory Council
Anantanand Rambachan, Hindu scholar, author, and professor of religion at St. Olaf College
Joy Alappatt, bishop of the Syro-Malabar Catholic Church
Prem Rawat, also known as Guru Maharaji Ji, head of the Divine Light Mission and later organizations
Muzammil Siddiqi, Ph.D., chairman, Fiqh Council of North America
Yasir Nadeem al Wajidi, Chicago-based Muslim scholar, educationist and author
Paramahansa Yogananda, yoga guru and founder of Self-Realization Fellowship
Ravi Zacharias, Christian evangelist and apologist


== Science and technology ==

Yellapragada Subbarow (1895–1948), pioneering biochemist who discovered ATP, the human body's energy molecule.
Ajay Bhatt (b. 1957), co-inventor of the USB; Chief Client Platform Architect at Intel
Ajit V. Pai, chairman of the United States Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
Ajit Varki, physician-scientist
Amar Gopal Bose, PhD in electrical engineering, founder and chairman of Bose Corporation
A. Hari Reddi, distinguished professor and Lawrence J. Ellison Endowed Chair in Musculoskeletal Molecular Biology at the University of California, Davis
Bimal Kumar Bose, pioneer in power electronics
Amit Goyal, scientist and inventor
Amit Singhal, Google Fellow, the designation the company reserves for its elite master engineers in the area of "ranking algorithm"
Amitabha Ghosh, the only Asian on NASA's Mars Pathfinder mission
Anil Dash, blogger and technologist
Sharat Kumar Roy, geologist and adventurer. A peak on Baffin Island as "Mount Sharat" is named after him by United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
Anirvan Ghosh, neuroscientist
Govindjee, biochemist
Arjun Makhijani, electrical and nuclear engineer; president of the Institute for Energy and Environmental Research
Arun Netravali, scientist; former president of Bell Labs; former CTO of Lucent; pioneer of digital technology, including HDTV and MPEG4
Arvind Rajaraman, theoretical physicist and string theorist
Avtar Saini, co-led the development of the Pentium processor Intel; holds seven patents related to microprocessor design
Bedabrata Pain, co-inventor of the active pixel sensor
C. Kumar N. Patel, developed the carbon dioxide laser, used as a cutting tool in surgery and industry
Deepak Pandya, neuroanatomist
Arati Prabhakar, former director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, Science Advisor to the President, director of DARPA, and director of National Institute of Standards and Technology
Dhairya Dand, inventor and artist
DJ Patil, Chief Data Scientist of the United States Office of Science and Technology Policy
Joy A. Thomas, senior data scientist at Google, information theorist and author
George Sudarshan, physicist, author; first to propose the existence of the tachyon
Jogesh Pati, theoretical physicist at the University of Maryland, College Park
Kalpana Chawla, NASA Space Shuttle astronaut, who died in the Columbia Space Shuttle disaster
Khem Shahani, microbiologist who conducted pioneer research on probiotics; discovered the DDS-1 strain of Lactobacillus acidophilus
Krishan Sabnani, engineer and senior vice president of the Networking Research Laboratory at Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs in New Jersey
Krishna Bharat, principal scientist at Google; created Google News
Kuzhikalail M. Abraham, pioneer in lithium and lithium-ion battery technologies, professor, Northeastern university, Boston, Massachusetts and president, E-KEM Sciences, Needham, Massachusetts
Mahadev Satyanarayanan, computer science professor at Carnegie Mellon University; pioneer of research in mobile and pervasive computing
Mani Lal Bhaumik, scientist, contributor to excimer laser technology, entrepreneur and philanthropist
Mathukumalli Vidyasagar, control theorist
Narinder Singh Kapany, physicist, the "father of fiber optics"
Nalini Nadkarni, ecologist who pioneered the study of Costa Rican rain forest canopies
Noshir Gowadia, design engineer
Om Malik, technology journalist and blogger
Pran Nath, theoretical physicist at Northeastern University
Pranav Mistry, Sixth Sense Project
Raj Reddy, founder of the Robotics Institute at Carnegie Mellon University; winner of the Turing Award
Raja Chari, astronaut chosen for Artemis Moon mission
Rajeev Motwani, professor, angel investor
Rajiv Dutta, technology manager
Rajiv Joshi, Inventor, Vice President of IEEE
Ramesh K. Agarwal, aviation pioneer; William Palm Professor of Engineering at Washington University
Ramesh Raskar, Femto-camera inventor, MIT Professor
Rangaswamy Srinivasan, member of the Inventors' Hall of Fame for pioneering work on excimer laser surgery
Ruchi Sanghvi, first female engineer of Facebook; former VP of Operations, Dropbox
Sabeer Bhatia, co-founder of Hotmail
Samir Mitragotri, professor of chemical engineering and bioengineering at University of California, Santa Barbara
Sasikanth Manipatruni, Pioneer in the area of Spintronics, Silicon Photonics, Optomechanics and In Memory Computing
Satya N. Atluri, aerospace and mechanics, Excellence in Aviation Medal, FAA, 1998; Recipient of Padma Bhushan in 2013 in Science & Engineering from the President of India, elected to membership to National Academies of Engineering, USA (1996) and India (1997)
Salman Khan, founder of Khan Academy
Sharmila Bhattacharya, head of the Biomodel Performance and Behavior laboratory at NASA Ames Research Center
VA Shiva Ayyadurai, inventor, scientist, former guest lecturer at MIT
Siddhartha Mukherjee, scientist, physician, winner of Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction
Siva S. Banda, aerospace engineer and researcher, recipient of a Silver Medal from the Royal Aeronautical Society, a Presidential Rank Award, and elected to membership in the National Academy of Engineering
Subhash Kak, head of the Computer Science department at Oklahoma State University
Subrah Iyar, co-founder and CEO of Webex Communications
Subrata Roy, plasma physicist, professor of aerospace engineering at University of Florida, inventor of the Wingless Electromagnetic Air Vehicle
Sunita Williams, NASA astronaut
Shya Chitaley - Paleo botanist
Swapan Chattopadhyay, particle accelerator physicist
Swati Mohan, NASA space engineer
Thomas Anantharaman, computer statistician specializing in Bayesian inference
Thomas Zacharia, computational scientist
V. Mohan Reddy, pediatric cardiothoracic surgeon at Stanford
Vamsi Mootha, physician-scientist and computational biologist
Suchir Balaji, computer scientist turned whistleblower who worked for OpenAI.
Vic Gundotra, former senior vice president, Engineering for Google
Vijay Raghunath Pandharipande, physicist
Vineeta Rastogi, public health worker
Sirisha Bandla, space engineer
Asim Duttaroy, Medical Scientist


=== Medicine ===

Amit Patel, cardiovascular surgeon and stem cell researcher; first person to inject stem cells directly into the heart
Anita Goel, Harvard-MIT physicist, physician; expert in nanobiophysics and nanotechnology; chairman and CEO of Nanobiosym; inventor of Gene-RADAR technology
Ashutosh Tewari, professor of urology at New York Presbyterian Hospital; prostate cancer surgeon
Atul Gawande, general and endocrine surgeon, professor, medical author, and National Book Award finalist
Balamurali Ambati, world's youngest doctor, at age 17
Deepak Chopra, alternative medicine advocate, author and public speaker
E. Premkumar Reddy, oncologist; director of Fels institute of cancer research and molecular biology at Temple University
Harvinder Sahota, cardiologist; inventor of the FDA-approved perfusion balloon angioplasty; holds patents of 24 other medical inventions
Inder Verma, Professor of Molecular Biology in the Laboratory of Genetics at Salk Institute for Biological Studies and University of California, San Diego
Joia Mukherjee, associate professor with the Division of Global Health Equity at the Brigham and Women's Hospital and the Department of Global Health and Social Medicine at Harvard Medical School
Paul Antony, MD, MPH, chief medical officer for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA)
Ragavendra R. Baliga, FACC, FACP, FRCP (Edin), Professor of Medicine at; Ohio State University College of Medicine
Sangeeta Bhatia, Harvard-MIT doctor and scientist; engineer of artificial liver cells
Sanjay Gupta, neurosurgeon; CNN chief medical correspondent;
Vivek Murthy (b. 1977), 19th and former Surgeon General of the United States; former vice admiral of U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Officer Corps
Aseem Shukla (b. 1972), Professor of Surgery (Urology) at the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, co-founder of Hindu American Foundation
Kiran C Patel (b. 1949), cardiologist, philanthropist, serial entrepreneur, and hotelier
Asim Duttaroy, Medical Scientist
Deborah Persaud (b. 1960), virologist
Alok Kanojia, psychiatrist and mental health coach


== Sports ==

Adeel Alam, professional wrestler best known ring name Mustafa Ali (Indian mother)
Prakash Amritraj (b. 1983), tennis player (born in the US)
Stephen Amritraj (b. 1984), tennis player
Sanjay Beach (b. 1966), former National Football League wide receiver; played for the San Francisco 49ers and the Green Bay Packers
Mohini Bhardwaj, second Indian American Olympic medalist, 2004 Summer Olympics silver medalist in gymnastics
Vinay Bhat, chess grandmaster
Raj Bhavsar, third Indian American Olympic medalist, 2008 Summer Olympics bronze medalist in the team gymnastics competition
Shaun Bridgmohan, jockey
Unmukt Chand, cricketer
Ashish Chattha, soccer player
Brandon Chillar, NFL player, linebacker for the Green Bay Packers (father of Indian descent)
Carlos Cordeiro, President of the United States Soccer Federation
Sean Desai (b. 1983), NFL coach and defensive coordinator for the Chicago Bears
Jignesh Desai, cricketer
Sonjay Dutt, TNA pro wrestler
The Great Khali, WWE pro wrestler
Alexi Grewal, first Indian American to win an Olympic medal, gold medalist in 1984 Summer Olympics in cycling
Sunil Gulati, former President of the United States Soccer Federation
Nezam Hafiz, cricketer and victim of the September 11 attacks
Amjad Khan, cricketer
Ibrahim Khaleel, cricketer
Noshtush Kenjige, cricketer
Thirunavukkarasu Kumaran, cricketer
Iris Kyle, professional bodybuilder
Anil Lashkari, cricketer
Sanjay Lal, wide receivers coach for the Dallas Cowboys
Rajiv Maragh, jockey
Aditya Mishra, cricketer
Mike Mohamed, former NFL player of Punjabi Mexican American descent
Sushil Nadkarni, American cricketer
Arjun Nimmala, baseball player
Ami Parekh, figure skater
Japen Patel, cricketer
Monank Patel, USA cricket captain
Mrunal Patel, cricketer
Raj Patel, golfer
Sagar Patel, cricketer
Smit Patel, cricketer
Timil Patel, cricketer
Laxmi Poruri, tennis player
Tara Prasad, figure skater
Abhimanyu Rajp, cricketer
Rajeev Ram, tennis player
Annand Mahendra "Victor" Ramdin, professional poker player and philanthropist
Sunitha Rao, tennis player
Srini Santhanam, cricketer
Jessy Singh, cricketer
Saurabh Netravalkar, USA cricket captain
Jaskaran Malhotra, cricketer
Milind Kumar, cricketer
Harmeet Singh, cricketer
Abhimanyu Mishra, chess grandmaster
Kanak Jha, Table Tennis player
Akshay Bhatia, golfer
Sahith Theegala, golfer
Neha Uberoi, tennis player
Shikha Uberoi, tennis player
Roopa Unnikrishnan, sports shooter and innovation consultant
Shiva Vashishat, cricketer


== See also ==
List of Indo-Caribbean Americans
List of Gujarati Americans
List of Malayali Americans
List of Telugu Americans
List of Tamil Americans
List of Sindhi Americans
List of Bengali Americans
List of Punjabi Americans
List of Punjabi Mexican Americans
Non-resident Indian and Person of Indian Origin
India–United States relations
Deportation of Indian nationals under Donald Trump


== References ==