Liverpool John Moores University (abbreviated LJMU) is a public research university in the city of Liverpool, England, United Kingdom. The university can trace its origins to the Liverpool Mechanics' School of Arts, established in 1823. This later merged to become Liverpool Polytechnic. In 1992, following an Act of Parliament, the Liverpool Polytechnic became what is now Liverpool John Moores University. It is named after Sir John Moores, a local businessman and philanthropist, who donated to the university's precursor institutions.
The university had 25,050 students in 2023/24, of which 20,105 are undergraduate students and 4,945 are postgraduate, making it the 30th largest university in the UK by total student population.
It is a member of the AMBA, MillionPlus, the Northern Consortium and the European University Association.


== History ==


=== Origins ===
Founded as a small mechanics institution (Liverpool Mechanics' School of Arts) in 1823, the institution grew over the centuries by converging and amalgamating with different colleges, including the F. L. Calder School of Domestic Science, the C. F. Mott College of Education, before eventually becoming Liverpool Polytechnic in 1970. The university also has a long history of providing training, education and research to the maritime industry, dating back to the formation of the Liverpool Nautical College in 1892.
The institution then became a university under the terms of the Further and Higher Education Act 1992 under the new title of "Liverpool John Moores University". This new title was approved by the Privy Council on 15 September 1992. The university took its name from Sir John Moores, the founder of the Littlewoods empire. Moores was a great believer in the creation of opportunity for all, which embodies the ethos of LJMU in providing educational routes for people of all ages and from all backgrounds. This belief led Sir John Moores to invest in the institution and facilities, such as the John Foster Building (housing the Liverpool Business School), designed by and named after leading architect John Foster. With the institution's backgrounds dating back as far as 1823, many of the university buildings date back also, with aesthetically pleasing Georgian and Victorian buildings found on a few of the campuses.


=== Present day ===

LJMU now has more than 27,000 students from over 100 countries world-wide, 2,400 staff and 250 degree courses. LJMU was awarded the Queen's Anniversary Prize in 2005.
Currently, Liverpool John Moores University is receiving more applications than previously seen; according to data in 2009, the total number of applications submitted to LJMU was 27,784.
On 28 March 2022, former student and founder of Mowgli, Nisha Katona was installed as Chancellor of the university. Previously, in 2008, astrophysicist and Queen lead guitarist Brian May was appointed the fourth Chancellor of Liverpool John Moores University. He replaced outgoing Chancellor Cherie Blair, wife of former Prime Minister Tony Blair. Honourary fellows in attendance at the ceremony included astronomer Sir Patrick Moore and actor Pete Postlethwaite. May was succeeded as Chancellor by judge Sir Brian Leveson in 2013.
LJMU is a founding member of the Northern Consortium, an educational charity owned by 11 universities in northern England.


== Campuses ==
The university is separated into two campuses in Liverpool:

City Campus, mainly situated on Byrom Street and surrounding Great Crosshall Street up to Liverpool Exchange railway station, houses buildings such as the James Parsons Building, Avril Robarts Library and the faculties of Science, Engineering and Technology and Health.
Mount Pleasant Campus, next to the Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral and the University of Liverpool, contains the John Lennon Art and Design Building, Aldham Robarts Library and is home to the faculties of Business and Law and Arts, Professional and Social Studies. The Knowledge Quarter is also regarded to be part of this campus.
Between the two campuses is the Copperas Hill Site, opened in summer 2021, containing many faculties moved from the former IM Marsh Campus, and home to the Student Life and LJMU Sports Buildings. Its location between the two sites has been described by the university to help connect both of its campuses together, and is not regarded to be part of either. It is however closer to the Mount Pleasant Campus and separated from the City Campus by the A5047, and Liverpool Lime Street railway station.


=== Libraries ===

There are currently two libraries operated by LJMU, one for either campus:

The Aldham Robarts Library is part of the Mount Pleasant Campus, and provides for students studying at the Mount Pleasant Campus or otherwise residing in the central Knowledge Quarter area. The library is situated on Maryland Street and caters mainly for the Faculty of Business and Law and the Faculty of Media, Arts and Social Science.
The Avril Robarts Library is part of the City Campus, and mainly provides services to students studying in the City Campus. It is located on Tithebarn Street, and covers three faculties: Faculty of Health, the Faculty of Science and the Faculty of Technology and Environment. The library hosts the Superlambanana sculpture at its front.
There is an LRC present in the Learning Commons of the Student Life Building on the Copperas Hill site between the two campuses. 
Students of the university can use any library in term-time and some non-term time periods within the library's opening hours. The Student Life Building is open 24/7 in term time. Students need their student identification card for entry to all buildings.
There are more than 68,500 books in the Libraries' collections, with 1,630 work spaces available for students 24 hours a day. In addition to this there are over 16,000 e-books and 5,000 e-journals available. It is a member of the Libraries Together: Liverpool Learning Partnership (evolved from Liverpool Libraries Group) which formed in 1990. Under which, a registered reader at any of the member libraries can have access rights to the other libraries within the partnership.


=== Tom Reilly Building ===
The Tom Reilly Building houses the School of Sports and Exercise Sciences and the School of Natural Sciences and Psychology, which are both part of the Faculty of Science. Some 8,000 students use the building which is located at LJMU's City Campus on Byrom Street. The five storey, 6,493 m2 (69,890 sq ft) building was completed in November 2009 and opened in March 2010 by Liverpool F.C. captain Steven Gerrard. The building provides sports and science facilities including; appetite laboratories, psychology testing labs, neuroscience labs, an indoor 70 m (230 ft) running track, force plates, caren disc, physiology suites, a DEXA scanner, a driving simulator and a chronobiology lab.


== Organisation and structure ==


=== Faculties ===

The university is organised into five faculties (which are each split into schools or centres), most of the faculties are based at a particular campus site however, with many joint honours degrees and some conventional degrees, the faculties overlap meaning students' degrees are from both faculties. The five faculties are:

Faculty of Business and Law
Liverpool Business School
School of Law
Faculty of Arts, Professional and Social Studies
John Lennon Art and Design Building
Liverpool Screen School
School of Education
School of Humanities and Social Science
School of Justice Studies
Institute of Culture Capital
Faculty of Health
School of Nursing and Allied Health
Public Health Institute
School of Psychology
Faculty of Science
School of Biological and Environmental Sciences
School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences
School of Natural Sciences and Psychology
School of Sport and Exercise Sciences
Faculty of Engineering and Technology
Astrophysics Research Institute
School of Civil Engineering and Built Environment
School of Computer Science and Mathematics
School of Engineering
LJMU Maritime Centre


=== Governance ===


== Academic profile ==
LJMU is highly ranked for teaching and research in Sports and Exercise Sciences. The Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE) awarded LJMU £4.5 million over five years for the establishment of a Centre for Excellence in Teaching and Learning (CETL). The CETL award recognises LJMU's record for Physical Education, Dance, Sport and Exercises Sciences. LJMU is the only United Kingdom university to be awarded an Ofsted Grade A in Physical Education and it is also the premier institution for both teaching and research in Sport and Exercise Sciences.


=== Business School ===
Liverpool Business School (LBS) is located in the Redmonds Building on the Mount Pleasant Campus and has over 2,500 students and 100 academics.
LBS offers undergraduate, postgraduate (including an Executive MBA) and research based programmes. Research areas include International Banking, Economics and Finance, Sustainable Enterprise, Public Service Management, Development of Modern Economic Thought, Performance Management, Marketing, Project Management, and Market Research.


=== Research ===

In the 2001 Research Assessment Exercise (RAE), LJMU reported notable research strengths in general engineering and sports-related sciences. By the 2008 RAE, LJMU was the top-performing post-92 university for Anthropology, Electrical and Electronic Engineering, General Engineering, Physics (Astrophysics) and Sports-Related Studies. According to the UK Research Assessment Exercise 2014 (RAE 2014), LJMU every unit of assessment submitted was rated as at least 45% internationally excellent or better. In 2012, the university's scientist published notable research suggesting that the dinosaur's extinction may have been caused by increased methane production from the dinosaurs, with some informally saying that dinosaurs "farted" their way to extinction.


=== Rankings ===

Liverpool John Moores University was included in the new 2013 Times Higher Education 100 under 50, ranking 72 out of 100. The list aims to show the rising stars in the global academy under the age of 50 years.
First Destination Survey results show that 89% of LJMU graduates are in employment or undertaking postgraduate study within six months of graduating.


== Student life ==


=== Students' Union ===

Students at the university are represented by the John Moores Students' Union.
Representation for all students is central and is conducted by executive officers elected annually. In most cases, these students will be on a sabbatical from their studies. The election process is normally contested in mid April, successful candidates assuming office the following academic year.


=== Sports ===

Liverpool John Moores University has BUCS-registered teams in badminton, basketball, cricket, football, cycling, hockey, netball, rugby league, rugby union, tennis, volleyball, swimming, and American football. Many of the sports teams compete in BUCS competitions. Liverpool Students' Union has 15 BUCS sports, from which 36 teams run, catering for over 800 athletes. In recent years, LJMU students have competed for BUCS representative squads, in national finals and at World University Championships. In addition, the Students' Union also runs intramural sports leagues.

The university also enjoys success at national and world level. Gymnast Beth Tweddle studied at LJMU and has achieved national, Commonwealth, European, and World medals whilst also competing at the Olympic Games.
Every year the university sports compete for 'The Varsity Cup' in the inter-university derby, Liverpool John Moores University Vs. University of Liverpool. The competing sports include: badminton, basketball, hockey, football, netball, volleyball, swimming, tennis, and the snowriders racing team.


== Notable alumni ==

Joe Anderson, former Mayor of Liverpool
Caroline Aherne (actress, comedy writer, The Royle Family)
Martyn Bernard (2010 European Athletics Championships bronze medalist high jumper)
Rebecca Bisland (Irish international footballer)
Rachel Brown (England women's national football team goalkeeper)
Timothy Brown (musician, The Boo Radleys)
Stephen Crowe, English composer
Bambos Charalambous (MP)
Stephen Byers (MP)
Julian Cope (British musician, author)
Dafydd Elis-Thomas, Baron Elis-Thomas (Welsh politician) (MS) (MP)
Claire Foy (actress)
Zack Gibson (professional wrestler)
Neena Gill (MEP)
Andreja Gomboc (astrophysicist)
Mark Hendrick (MP)
Christy Holly (Head Coach of Louisville Royals in the NWSL)
George Howarth (MP)
John Lennon (The Beatles)
Matt Lloyd (Ice Sledge Hockey player)
Andy Merrifield, Marxist urban theorist
Steve Morgan, founder of Redrow plc
Margaret Murphy (crime writer)
Mohamed Nasheed (4th President of the Maldives)
Martin Offiah, rugby league player
Juan Carlos Osorio (football manager)
Tom Palin (painter)
Roxanne Pallett (actress, known from Emmerdale)
Les Parry, English football manager
Steve Parry (Olympic Games bronze medalist swimmer)
Vicky Pattison (Geordie Shore Reality personality)
Louise Pentland [Known online as 'Sprinkle of Glitter'] (YouTuber)
Michael Rimmer (2010 European Athletics Championships silver medalist 800 m runner)
Gareth Roberts (writer, Doctor Who and The Sarah Jane Adventures)
James Roby (St Helens R.F.C. rugby player)
Philip Selway (musician, Radiohead)
Andrew Stunell (MP)
Gemma Tumelty (52nd President of NUS)
Beth Tweddle, MBE Olympic medalist (gymnast)
Andi Watson (cartoonist)
Laura Watton (Original English-language manga artist)
Hannah Whelan (gymnast)
Ieuan Wyn Jones (Welsh politician) (MS) (MP)


== See also ==
Armorial of UK universities
List of universities in the UK
Liverpool Knowledge Quarter
Post-1992 universities


== References ==


== External links ==

Liverpool John Moores University
Liverpool John Moores University Students' Union
LJMUconnect - LJMU's Alumni network