Bartholomew (born Dimitrios Archontonis, 29 February 1940) is the current Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople since 1991. In accordance with his title, he is regarded as the primus inter pares (first among equals) in the Orthodox Church, and as a spiritual leader of the Eastern Orthodox Christians worldwide.
Bartholomew was born in the village of Agios Theodoros (officially called Zeytinliköy) on the island of Imbros (later renamed Gökçeada by the Turkish government). After his graduation, he held a position at the Patriarchal Theological Seminary of Halki, where he was ordained a priest. Later, he served as Metropolis of Philadelphia and Chalcedon and he became a member of the Holy Synod as well as other committees, prior to his enthronement as Patriarch.
Bartholomew's tenure has been characterized by intra-Orthodox cooperation and intra-Christian and inter-religious dialogue, such as formal visits to Roman Catholic, Old Catholic, Oriental Orthodox, and Muslim leaders previously visited by a patriarch. He has exchanged numerous invitations with church and state dignitaries. His efforts to promote religious freedom and human rights, his initiatives to advance religious tolerance among the world's religions, as well as his efforts to promote ecology and the protection of the environment, have been widely noted, and these endeavors have earned him the title "The Green Patriarch". 
Among his many international positions, he currently sits on the Board of World Religious Leaders for the Elijah Interfaith Institute. In 2018, the Moscow Patriarchate broke communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate as a result of disputes over his decision to grant autocephaly to the Orthodox Church of Ukraine.


== Early life and background ==
Dimitrios Arhondonis was born in the village of Agioi Theodoroi on the island of Imbros (now Gökçeada, Turkey), son of Christos and Meropi Archodónis (née Skarlatos), both of Greek descent. He was the fourth and last child and as a boy helped his father in his coffee shop that also doubled as a barber's.
He began his studies at Imbro and went on to attend the Zografeion Lyceum high school in Istanbul, then entered the Theological School of Halki on the island of that name (Turkish: Heybeliada), in the Sea of Marmara. There he gained a doctorate in theology. On 13 August 1961, he was ordained deacon and in the years 1961–1963 completed military service in the Turkish army with the rank of sublieutenant. Following this, from 1963 to 1968, with a study bourse from the Ecumenical Patriarchate, he gained diplomas in postgraduate specialization at the Oriental Institute of the Gregorian University in Rome, the Ecumenical Institute of Bossey (Switzerland) and the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich. Subsequently, he gained a doctorate from Rome's Gregorian University with a thesis regarding the codification of the canons and canonical decrees in the Orthodox Church, perfecting also in these years his knowledge of Latin, Italian, French, English, and German.


=== Ordinations and ecclesiastical appointments ===
13 August 1961: Diaconate – receiving the ecclesiastical name Bartholomew
19 October 1969: Priesthood
25 December 1973: Episcopacy – Metropolis of Philadelphia (Asia Minor)
14 January 1990: Enthronement as metropolitan of Chalcedon
22 October 1991: Elected archbishop of Constantinople, New Rome and ecumenical patriarch
2 November 1991: Enthronement in the Patriarchal Cathedral in the Phanar


== Patriarchate ==

As Ecumenical Patriarch, Bartholomew has been particularly active internationally. One of his first focuses has been on rebuilding the once persecuted Eastern Orthodox churches of the former Eastern Bloc following the fall of Communism there in 1990. As part of this effort, he has worked to strengthen ties among the various national churches and patriarchates of the Eastern Orthodox Church. He has also continued the reconciliation dialogue with the Catholic Church started by his predecessors and initiated dialogue with other faiths, including other Christian Churches, Muslims, and Jews.


=== Environmentalism ===

He has also gained a reputation as a prominent environmentalist, putting the support of the Ecumenical Patriarchate behind various international environmental causes. This has earned him the nicknames of "the Green Patriarch" and "the Green Pope", and in 2002 he was honored with the Sophie Prize for his contribution to environmentalism. He has also been honoured with the Congressional Gold Medal, the highest award which may be bestowed by the Legislative Branch of the United States government.


=== Turkey ===
In an interview published on 19 November 2006 in the daily newspaper Sabah, Bartholomew addressed the issues of religious freedom and the then upcoming papal trip of Pope Benedict XVI to Turkey. He also referred to the closing of the Halki seminary by saying: "As Turkish citizens, we pay taxes. We serve in the military. We vote. As citizens we do everything. We want the same rights. But it does not happen... If Muslims want to study theology, there are 24 theology faculties. Where are we going to study?" He also addressed the issue of his ecumenical title and it not being accepted by the Turkish government: "We've had this title since the 6th century... The word ecumenical has no political content. [...] This title is the only thing that I insist on. I will never renounce this title".


=== Ecumenical dialogue ===

During his trip to Turkey in November 2006, Pope Benedict XVI traveled to Istanbul on the invitation of Bartholomew. The pope participated in the feast day services of St. Andrew the First Apostle, the patron saint of the Church of Constantinople. This was the third official visit to the Ecumenical Patriarchate by a pope (the first being by Paul VI in 1967, and the second by John Paul II in 1979). He attended the papal inauguration of Pope Francis on 19 March 2013, paving the way for better Catholic–Orthodox relations. It was the first time that the spiritual head of Eastern Orthodox Christians had attended a papal inauguration since the Great Schism in 1054. After, he invited Pope Francis to travel with him to the Holy Land in 2014 to mark the fiftieth anniversary of the embrace between Patriarch Athenagoras I of Constantinople and Pope Paul VI. Pope Francis was also invited to the Patriarchate for the feast day of Saint Andrew (30 November).
It was after more than two decades as Ecumenical Patriarch, that Bartholomew was the target of an assassination plot which was planned to take place on 29 May 2013. One suspect was arrested and there is an ongoing search for two others.


=== Support of refugees, reunification and peace ===
On 16 April 2016, he visited, together with Pope Francis and Archbishop Hieronymus II, the Moria Refugee Camp in the island of Lesbos, to call the attention of the world to the refugee issue. In December 2018, he visited the Korean Demilitarized Zone (KDZ) and prayed for permanent peace and unification on the Korean Peninsula.


=== Autocephaly of the Orthodox Church of Ukraine ===

In October 2018 the synod of the Ecumenical Patriarchate agreed to grant autocephaly (self-governing) to the Orthodox Church in Ukraine, and to revoke the legal binding of the letter of 1686 which led to the Russian Orthodox Church establishing jurisdiction over the all of Rus's Church (including those located within borders of current Ukraine) and to lift the excommunications which affected clergy and faithful of two then unrecognized Orthodox churches in Ukraine, the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church (UAOC) and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate (UOC-KP). In response to revoking a legal binding letter, the Russian Orthodox Church announced it was cutting ties of communion with the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople, which marked the beginning of the 2018 Moscow–Constantinople schism.
On 5 January 2019, Bartholomew granted autocephaly to the newly founded Orthodox Church of Ukraine by Canonical act.


=== Possession of Vatican Saint Peter Bone Fragments ===
On 2 July 2019, it was announced that Pope Francis had given Bartholomew possession of nine bone fragments believed to belong to Saint Peter and which were publicly displayed by Pope Francis in November 2013 during a Vatican "Year of Faith" Mass. Bartholomew, who also gained possession of the bronze reliquary in which they are displayed, described the Pope's gesture as "brave and bold".


=== Macedonian Orthodox Church ===
In 2022, the Ecumenical Patriarchate accepted the Macedonian Orthodox Church – Archdiocese of Ohrid into communion, recognizing North Macedonia as a canonical jurisdiction.


=== Russian invasion of Ukraine ===

Bartholomew has criticised both the Russian state and the Russian church for the invasion of Ukraine, calling it a crime of aggression and saying that it has caused enormous suffering both to the Ukrainian and the Russian people. In Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew's opinion he says "This is the theology that the sister Church of Russia began to teach, trying to justify an unjust, unholy, unprovoked, diabolical war against a sovereign and independent country – Ukraine".


== Distinctions ==


=== Orders ===
 Finland: Grand Cross of the Order of the Holy Lamb (1993)
 Georgia: Order of the Golden Fleece
 Georgia: Grand Collar of the Order of the Eagle of Georgia (22 October 2011) by Prince David Bagration of Mukhrani at Saint George's chapel.
 Georgia: Order of Saint King David the Psalmist by Prince Nugzar Bagration-Gruzinsky of Georgia (27 August 2015) in a private ceremony in the patriarchal palace
 Slovakia: Order of the White Double Cross by President Ivan Gašparovič (27 May 2013)
 Ukraine: Order of Liberty (27 July 2013) and Order of Merit 1st class (5 January 2019)


=== Academic ===
He received an honorary doctorate from the Hankuk University of Foreign Studies in South Korea on 23 June 2005.
In October 2009, he received an honorary doctorate from Fordham University in the United States.
On December 19th, 2013 he received an honorary doctorate from Bogaziçi University in Istanbul, in recognition of his pioneering initiatives on environmental issues as well as for his efforts in the organization of environmental symposia to address wider audiences and for conveying messages with widespread impact.
He received an honorary PhD. from The Hebrew University in Jerusalem on 6 December 2017.
In December 2018, he received an honorary doctorate from the National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy in Ukraine.
In October 2021, he received an honorary degree from the University of Notre Dame in the United States.
On 6 October 2024, Patriarch Bartholomew received a Doctor of Divinity honoris causa from The University of Notre Dame Australia in recognition of his inspiring work to unify contemporary society.


=== Other ===
In 1997, Bartholomew received the Congressional Gold Medal. The Congressional Gold Medal and the Presidential Medal of Freedom are the highest civilian awards given by the United States.
In 2002, he received the Sophie Prize for his work on the environment.
In April 2008, he was included on the Time 100 most influential people in the world list. On 13 March 2007, the third anniversary of the death of Cardinal Franz König, Bartholomew was awarded in Vienna's St. Stephen Cathedral the "Cardinal König Prize" from the Foundation "Communio et Progressio".
In 2012, he received the Four Freedoms Award for the Freedom of Worship.
On 3 December 2013, he received the Global Thinkers Forum 2013 Award for Excellence in Peace and Collaboration.
In 2019, he received the Plaque of St. Erik from the Archbishop of Church of Sweden, for promoting religious freedom, calling attention to the needs of refugees and care for creation.
On 1 November 2021, Bartholomew received the Human Dignity Award from the American Jewish Committee (AJC), a global Jewish advocacy organization. The AJC honor recognizes Bartholomew's singular care for humanity and the environment, exceptional commitment to interreligious coexistence, and indispensable advancement of Orthodox-Jewish relations.
In October 2022, he was one of the first faith leaders to have an audience with King Charles III.
On 17 March 2025, the Institut de France's  Academy of Moral and Political Sciences elected him a Foreign Associate Member, giving him a chair formerly held by Pope Benedict XVI.
On 10 April 2025, he was awarded the Templeton Prize for "his pioneering efforts to bridge scientific and spiritual understandings of humanity’s relationship with the natural world, bringing together people of different faiths to heed a call for stewardship of creation."


== Notes ==


== References ==


== See also ==
Archons of the Ecumenical Patriarchate
Church of St George, Istanbul
Ecumenism
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia
Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America
History of the Eastern Orthodox Church
List of current Christian leaders
List of ecumenical patriarchs of Constantinople
Mount Athos


== External links ==

Official biography
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I - A Passion for Peace
A Patriarch in Dire Straits by John Couretas, director of communications at the Acton Institute and executive director of the American Orthodox Institute
End of Byzantium Archived 8 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine interview by Helena Drysdale from Aeon Magazine