Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox is a 2013 American adult animated superhero film directed by Jay Oliva and written by Jim Krieg. It is an adaptation of the 2011 comic book crossover "Flashpoint" by Geoff Johns and Andy Kubert. The film stars Justin Chambers as Barry Allen / Flash, C. Thomas Howell as Eobard Thawne / Professor Zoom, Michael B. Jordan as Victor Stone / Cyborg, Kevin McKidd as Thomas Wayne / Batman and Cary Elwes as Orin / Arthur Curry / Aquaman. The film also sees actors reprising roles from other DC animated series, including Kevin Conroy as Bruce Wayne / Batman, Nathan Fillion as Hal Jordan / Green Lantern, Ron Perlman as Slade Wilson / Deathstroke, Dana Delany as Lois Lane, Vanessa Marshall as Princess Diana / Wonder Woman and Dee Bradley Baker as Etrigan the Demon.
It is the 18th film of the DC Universe Animated Original Movies and the first film of the DC Animated Movie Universe.
Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox was released on July 30, 2013, and was re-released on September 10 as a 2-disc special edition.


== Plot ==
While visiting the grave of his mother Nora Allen, Barry Allen, known as the Flash, is alerted to a break-in by Captain Cold, Heat Wave, Mirror Master, Captain Boomerang, and Top at the Flash Museum. Battling the rogues, he discovers that they have been hired by his arch-enemy Professor Zoom as part of a plan to destroy Central City. With the help of the Justice League, Zoom's plot is thwarted. While being taken to prison, Zoom taunts Flash over the death of his mother.
The next day, Barry discovered that the world has changed: his powers are gone, his mother is alive, his wife Iris is married to someone else, and the Justice League does not exist. Aquaman and his Atlantean forces have sunk Western Europe, while Wonder Woman has led the Amazons in conquering the United Kingdom. Both forces have been at war since an alliance between them collapsed after Wonder Woman killed Aquaman's wife Mera, who had confronted her for having an affair with Aquaman. Cyborg has assembled a team to eliminate both parties and approaches Batman to join them, but his refusal leads the government to scrap the plan, and instead recruit pilot Hal Jordan to fly an alien spacecraft to bomb the Atlanteans.
Barry visits the Batcave, but is attacked by Batman, who he realizes is not Bruce Wayne but his father Thomas. Attempting to explain things to Batman, Barry tries to show him his Flash costume, but the costume in his ring turns out to be Professor Zoom's, causing Barry to believe Zoom is responsible for the timeline alteration. Convinced of Barry's good intentions, Batman helps him recreate the accident that gave him his powers, but the attempt fails and Barry is severely burned as a result.
In London, Steve Trevor attempts to extricate reporter Lois Lane, but is discovered by the Amazons and killed. The Amazons hunt down Lane, who is rescued by the local resistance. Meanwhile, in the remains of Paris, Deathstroke and Lex Luthor are attacked and killed by Aquaman's forces while tracking the energy trail of Aquaman's new weapon, which is powered by a captive Captain Atom. At the Batcave, after realizing that his memories are changing, Barry asks Batman to recreate the accident again. The second attempt is successful. Barry regains his powers but cannot travel through time because Zoom is also using the Speed Force.
Barry recruits more allies, beginning with Superman, who was imprisoned by the U.S. government after his ship crashed into Metropolis. With the aid of Batman and Cyborg, they liberate Superman, who, after being empowered by Earth's yellow sun, fends off the facility's security before fleeing in fear and confusion. Barry collapses as his memories continue to change and is taken to Billy Batson's home to recuperate. There, he learns that Jordan's attack has failed, and the final battle between Amazons and Atlanteans has begun.
Barry convinces the superheroes to help stop the war, and they depart for Britain aboard Batman's jet, only to be shot down upon arrival. Batson and his siblings combine into Captain Thunder to fight Wonder Woman, while Barry, Cyborg and Batman occupy Aquaman. Zoom reveals himself and viciously beats Barry. He explains that Barry is responsible for this alternate timeline: Barry traveled back in time to save his mother, fracturing the fabric of reality. Wonder Woman uses her lasso to force Captain Thunder back into Batson and kills him.
Superman arrives but cannot save Cyborg from Aquaman, who remotely detonates his Captain Atom-powered bomb. As the explosion tears across the landscape, Zoom is killed by Batman. The dying Batman urges Barry to run, giving him a letter addressed to Bruce. Barry races back in time and stops his earlier self, fracturing time and creating a new timeline. Barry awakens at his desk and finds that reality is apparently back to normal. He visits Bruce to tell him about everything that occurred and gives him the letter. Wayne thanks him before Barry runs off.
In a post-credits scene, a Boom Tube opens in space above Earth and a horde of Parademons emerges.


== Voice cast ==


== Soundtrack ==

The soundtrack to Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox was released on September 10, 2013. The music was composed by Frederik Wiedmann.


== Reception ==


=== Critical reception ===
The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 100%, with an average score of 7.3, based on 6 reviews.
IGN gave a Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox 8.5/10, and said it has outdone its source material. It called the style "sleek and hard-hitting", praised C. Thomas Howell's voice acting which it said brought "unnerving dread", and stated that it is the "most hardcore DC animated movie to date", although it also warns against the level of violence and said that the numerous cameos "detract from the main story".


=== Sales ===
The film earned $5,263,980 from domestic home video sales.


== DC Animated Movie Universe ==

The post-credits scene in Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox sets up the film Justice League: War which officially began the DC Animated Movie Universe. A plot point towards the end of the film is also revisited and expanded in Suicide Squad: Hell to Pay, which also belongs to the DC Animated Movie Universe continuity. It is also revisited in the final film Justice League Dark: Apokolips War of this continuity when John Constantine looks into Barry Allen's mind after freeing him from Darkseid's slavery.


== See also ==
List of DC Multiverse worlds


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==

Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox at Internet Movie Database
Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox Archived May 12, 2016, at the Wayback Machine at www.dccomics.com